arXiv:1001.0487v2  [astro-ph.SR]  5 Jan 2010Astrophysics and Space Science
DOI 10.1007/s •••••-•••-••••-•
Numerical simulations of the κ-mechanism with
convection
T. Gastine1•B. Dintrans1
c/circlecopyrtSpringer-Verlag ••••
Abstract A strong coupling between convection and
pulsations is known to play a major role in the dis-
appearance of unstable modes close to the red edge of
the classical Cepheid instability strip. As mean-ﬁeld
models of time-dependent convection rely on weakly-
constrainedparameters(e.g.Baker1987), wetacklethis
problem by the means of 2-D Direct Numerical Simu-
lations (DNS) of κ-mechanism with convection.
Using a linear stability analysis, we ﬁrst determine
the physical conditions favourable to the κ-mechanism
to occur inside a purely-radiative layer. Both the in-
stability strips and the nonlinear saturation of unstable
modes are then conﬁrmed by the corresponding DNS.
We next present the new simulations with convection,
where a convective zone and the driving region over-
lap. The coupling between the convective motions and
acoustic modes is then addressed by using projections
onto an acoustic subspace.
Keywords Hydrodynamics - Instabilities - Stars: os-
cillations - Convection - Methods: numerical
1 Introduction
Eddington (1917) discovered an excitation mechanism
of stellar oscillations that is related to the opacity be-
haviour in ionisation zones: the κ-mechanism, where
κdenotes the opacity. This mechanism occurs when
the opacity varies during compression phases so as
to block the emerging radiative ﬂux (Zhevakin 1963;
Cox and Whitney 1958). Ionisation regions correspond
to a strong increase in opacity that leads to the opac-
ity bumps responsible for the local excitation of modes.
T. Gastine
B. Dintrans
1LATT, Universit´ e de Toulouse, CNRS, 14 avenue Edouard Be-
lin, F-31400 Toulouse, FranceThese driving zones should nevertheless be located at
a precise radius inside the star, neither too close to
the surface nor to deep, in order to balance the damp-
ing that mainly occurs at the surface. It deﬁnes the
so-called transition region that shapes the limit be-
tweenthe quasi-adiabaticinteriorandthe stronglynon-
adiabatic surface. For classical Cepheids that pul-
sate in the fundamental acoustic mode, this transi-
tion region is located at a temperature T≃4×
104K corresponding to the second helium ionisation
(Baker and Kippenhahn 1965). However, the bump lo-
cation is not solely responsible for the acoustic instabil-
ity. A careful treatment of the κ-mechanism would in-
volve dynamical couplings with convection, metallicity
eﬀects and both realistic equations of state and opac-
ity tables (Bono, Marconi, and Stellingwerf 1999). The
purpose of our model is to simplify the hydrodynamic
approachwhileretainingthe leading-order phenomenon
–e.g. thelocationofthe opacitybump oritsamplitude–
such that feasible direct numerical simulations of the κ-
mechanism with convection can be achieved.
2 The ﬁrst step: radiative models in 1-D
We ﬁrst focus on radial modes propagating in a purely-
radiative and partially-ionised layer and then restrict
our study to the 1-D case. Our model consists of a
local zoom about an ionisation region and is composed
byamonatomicandperfect gas(with γ=cp/cv= 5/3)
underboth aconstant gravity /vector gand kinematic viscosity
ν. All quantities in our model are dimensionless, e.g.
temperature is given in unit of the surface temperature
of the star, length in unit of a fraction of the star radius
and velocity in unit of the sound speed at the surface.
In order to easily investigate the inﬂuence of the
opacity bump on the stability, we adopt the following2
Fig. 1 Inﬂuence of the hollow parameters on the conduc-
tivity proﬁle for Kmax= 10−2andTbump/Tsurf= 3.5.
conductivity hollow to mimic this bump (as κ∝1/K,
see Gastine and Dintrans 2008a, hereafter Paper I):
K0(T0) =Kmax/bracketleftbigg
1+A−π/2+arctan( σT+T−)
π/2+arctan( σe2)/bracketrightbigg
,(1)
withA= (Kmax−Kmin)/KmaxandT±=T0−Tbump±
e. HereT0istheequilibriumtemperatureproﬁle, Tbump
is the hollow central temperature, and σ, eandAde-
note its slope, width and relative amplitude, respec-
tively. Examples of common values of these parameters
are provided in Fig. 1.
2.1 Conditions for the instability
Using the well-known work integral formalism (e.g.
Unnoet al.1989), it is easy to show that the follow-
ing condition is necessary to get unstable modes by κ-
mechanism in variable stars:
dKT
dz<0 where KT≡/parenleftbigg∂lnK0
∂lnT0/parenrightbigg
ρ0. (2)
However, this condition is not suﬃcient as the ionisa-
tion region should also be located at a given location
in the star, neither too deep nor too close to its sur-
face. This area is the so-called transition region that
separates the quasi-adiabatic interior from the strongly
non-adiabatic surface and is deﬁned by (e.g. Cox 1980)
Ψ =∝angb∇acketleftcvT0∝angb∇acket∇ight∆m
ΠL≃1, (3)
where ∆ mis the integrated mass between the consid-
eredpointandthesurface,Πthemodeperiodand Lthe
Fig. 2 a ) Vertical proﬁle of the Ψ coeﬃcient (Eq. 3).
The superimposed green zone represents the location where
Ψ = 1±0.5.b) The real part of the work integral plotted
for the three diﬀerent equilibrium models. The dot-dashed
black line is for the constant radiative conductivity case.
c) Corresponding radiative conductivity proﬁles. d) Corre-
sponding equilibrium ﬁelds dKT/dz(Eq. 2).
luminosity. Ψ is the ratio between the thermal energy
embedded betweenthe givenradiusandthe surfaceand
the energy radiated during an oscillation period.
2.2 The linear stability analysis
Inordertocheckthesetwoconditions, weperformalin-
ear stability analysis by using the Linear Solver Builder
code(Valdettaro et al.2007). Bystartingwith the con-
ductivity proﬁles shown in Fig. 1, we ﬁrst compute the
equilibrium setup that is solution of both the hydro-
static and radiative equilibria given by
/vector∇p0=ρ0/vector gand div[ K0(T0)/vector∇T0] = 0, (4)
wherep0andρ0denote the equilibrium pressure and
density. Then, we solve the linear oscillation equations
for the perturbations by seeking normal modes of the
form exp( λt) withλ=τ+iω, whereωis the mode
frequency and τits growth or damping rate (unstable
modes corresponding to τ >0). By varying the hol-
low parameters, we then determine the physical con-
ditions that lead to unstable modes excited by the κ-
mechanism in our layer (cf. Paper I).
The two criteria (2) and (3) predict that modes are
unstable for a “suﬃcient” hollow (adequate amplitudeNumerical simulations of the κ-mechanism with convection 3
and width) that is located in the transition region.
Using the work integral computed from the obtained
eigenvectors, we indeed recover instability strips for the
κ-mechanism by considering the three diﬀerent equilib-
rium setups (Fig. 2):
•The ﬁrst case (dotted blue line, Tbump/Tsurf= 1.7)
corresponds to a hot star with an ionisation region
close to the surface. As the surrounding density is
small, Ψ ≪1 and the conductivity hollow hardly in-
ﬂuencestheworkintegral: drivingisunabletoprevail
over damping, leading to τ <0 orstablemodes.
•In the second case (solid green line, Tbump/Tsurf=
2.1), the radiative conductivity begins to decrease
signiﬁcantly at the location of the transition region
where Ψ ≃1. As a consequence, driving becomes im-
portant. Furthermore, the radiative conductivity in-
crease occurs where non-adiabatic eﬀects are already
signiﬁcant, i.e. Ψ <1 there. It means that no damp-
ing occurs between the hollow position and the sur-
face as the radiative ﬂux perturbations are frozen-in.
Driving is overcomingdamping in this case, therefore
τ >0 and modes are unstable.
•The third case (dashed red line, Tbump/Tsurf= 2.8)
corresponds to a cold star of which ionisation re-
gionislocateddeeperinthestellaratmospherewhere
Ψ≫1. Ionisation then occurs in a quasi-adiabatic
location. As a consequence, the excitation provided
by the conductivity hollow cannot balance the damp-
ing arising at the top of the layer, thus τ <0 and
modes are stable.
In conclusion, our ﬁrst radiative model of the κ-
mechanism is well able to reproduce the main physics
involved in the oscillations of Cepheid stars: (i)one
should have dKT/dz <0 to drive the oscillations; (ii)
the thermal engine underlying the conductivity hollow
should also be located in the transition region where
Ψ≃1 (Fig. 2).
2.3 Study of the nonlinear saturation
To conﬁrm both the results obtained previously in the
linear stability analysis and to investigate the result-
ing nonlinear saturation, we perform direct numerical
simulations of our problem. The idea is to start from
the most favourable initial conditions found in the sta-
bility analysis and then advance the general hydro-
dynamic equations in time. We use a modiﬁed ver-
sion of the public-domain ﬁnite-diﬀerence Pencil Code2
that includes an implicit solver of our own for the
radiative diﬀusion term in the temperature equation
(Gastine and Dintrans 2008b, hereafter Paper II).
2Seehttp://pencil-code.googlecode.com/ .
Fig. 3 a) Temporal power spectrum for the momentum
in the (z, ω)-plane. b)The resulting spectrum after in-
tegrating over depth. c)Comparison between normalised
momentum proﬁles for n= (0,2) modes according to the
DNS power spectrum (solid black line) and to the linear
stability analysis (dotted blue line).
To determine which modes are present in the DNS
in the nonlinear-saturation regime, we ﬁrst perform
a temporal Fourier transform of the momentum ﬁeld
ρu(z,t) and plot the resulting power spectrum in the
(z,ω)-plane (Fig. 3a). The mean spectrum follows by
integrating /hatwiderρu(z,ω) over depth (Fig. 3b). With this
method, acoustic modes are extracted because they
emerge as “shark-ﬁn proﬁles” about deﬁnite eigenfre-
quencies (Dintrans and Brandenburg 2004).
Several discrete peaks corresponding to normal
modes well appear but the fundamental mode close
toω0= 5.439 clearly dominates. Moreover, the lin-
ear eigenfunctions are compared to the mean proﬁles
computed from a zoom taken in the DNS power spec-
trumabouteigenfrequencies ω0= 5.439andω2= 11.06
(Fig. 3c). The agreement between the linear eigenfunc-
tions (dotted blue lines) and the DNS proﬁles (solid
black lines) is remarkable. In summary, Fig. 3 shows
that several overtones are present in the DNS, even for
long times. These overtones are however linearly stable
suggesting that some underlying energy transfers occur
between modes through nonlinear couplings.
These nonlinear interactions are investigated thanks
to a tool that measures the sound generation by turbu-
lent ﬂows (e.g. Bogdan, Cattaneo, and Malagoli 1993).4
It involves projections of the DNS physical ﬁelds onto
the regular and adjoint eigenvectors that are solutions
to the linear oscillation equations. The projection co-
eﬃcients then give the time evolution of each acoustic
mode that is present in the DNS separately . Further-
more, as the evolution of the kinetic energy of each
mode is also accessible with this method, one can fol-
low the energy transfer between modes.
Fig. 4 Time evolution of the kinetic energy ratio for the
n= 0 and n= 2 acoustic modes.
Figure 4 shows an example of the time evolution
of the kinetic energy ratio En/Etot
kinfor the two modes
n= 0 (i.e. the fundamental one) and n= 2 (i.e. the
second overtone). Here Endenotes the kinetic energy
embedded in the acoustic mode oforder n, whileEtot
kinis
the total kinetic energy in the simulation. After its lin-
ear transient growth, a given fraction of the fundamen-
tal mode energy is progressively transferred to the sec-
ond overtone until the nonlinear saturation is achieved
abovetime t≃150, with ﬁnally 85% ofthe total kinetic
energy in the n= 0 mode and the remaining 15% in the
n= 2 one. We recall that it is at a ﬁrst glance surpris-
ing to detect this second overtoneat long times because
it is linearly stable and should normally be damped by
diﬀusive eﬀects.
The reason for its presence lies in a favored coupling
in the period ratio between these two modes. Indeed,
the fundamental period is P0= 2π/ω0≃1.155 in this
simulation while the n= 2 one is P2≃0.568. As a
consequence, the corresponding period ratio is close to
one half ( P2/P0≃0.491) such that the second over-
tone is involved in the nonlinear saturation through a
2:1 resonance with the fundamental mode. The lin-
ear growth of the fundamental mode is then balanced
by the pumping of energy to the stable second over-
tone that behaves as an energy sink, leading to the full
limit-cycle stability.3 Convective models in 2-D
3.1 From radiative to convective setups
After the previous results obtained on purely radia-
tive models in 1-D, we next address the convection-
pulsation coupling that is suspected to quench the ra-
dial oscillations of Cepheids close to the red edge. The
idea is to slightly modify the unstable radiative setup
to obtain a convective zone superimposed to the ion-
isation region in 2-D simulations. The convective in-
stability obeys Schwarzschild’s criterion given by (e.g.
Chandrasekhar 1961)
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledT0
dz/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle>g
cp=⇒Fbot>gK0(T0)
cp. (5)
whereFbot=K0|dT0/dz|is the imposed bottom ﬂux.
For a given gravity gand conductivity hollow K0(T0),
convectionwillthereforedevelopforalargeenoughbot-
tom ﬂux satisfying Eq.(5).
Fig. 5 Snapshot of the vorticity ﬁeld /vector∇×/vector vin a 2-D model
with convection and κ-mechanism.
Figure 5 displays a snapshot of the vorticity ﬁeld ob-
tained in such a convective simulation at time t= 2500.
In order to ensure that the thermal relaxation is well
achieved, we ran this simulation for a much longer time
than in the purely-radiative case and the resolution is
256×256gridpoints. As expected, convection develops
in the middle of the box where the conductivity hollow
is located1. Moreover, because of the density contrast
across the convection zone, the vorticity is trapped in
strong convective plume downdrafts that easily over-
shoot in the stable zone below due to their low P´ eclet
number (Dintrans 2009).
1An animation of this simulation is provided at
http://www.ast.obs-mip.fr/users/tgastine/conv_kappa .avi.Numerical simulations of the κ-mechanism with convection 5
3.2 Evolution of acoustic modes with convection
To address the time evolution of the acoustic modes
that arepresentin the DNS with convection, weproject
as before the physical ﬁelds onto an appropriate acous-
tic subspace to get the projection coeﬃcient cℓn(t).
Hereℓdenotes the mode degree while nis its order
(withkx= (2π/Lx)ℓandLxis the width of the box).
Fig. 6 Evolution of the acoustic kinetic energy ratio for
two simulations with a weak convection (solid blue line) and
a stronger one (dashed green line).
Fig. 6 shows the total energy embedded in acoustic
modes for two simulations with convection that diﬀer
by their Rayleigh number given by
Ra =−gd4
conv
νχcpds
dz=(∇−∇ adia)gd4
conv
νχHp, (6)
whereHp=−(dlnp0/dz)−1is the pressure scale
height,dconvthe vertical extent of the convection zone,
χ=K0/ρ0cpthe radiativediﬀusivityand sthe entropy.
This number allows to quantify the strength of the con-
vective motions, that is, the critical Rayleigh number
above which convection develops is about 103for poly-
tropic stratiﬁcations (e.g. Gough et al.1976).
In the ﬁrst simulation (Ra = 4 ×104, solid blue line),
the Rayleigh number is slightly super-critical and the
convection intensity is weak. In this case, we see that
the acoustic energy ratio remains large (i.e. /greaterorsimilar80%,
the remaining 20% being in the convection) and the
nonlinear saturation is reached in the same way than
in the previous radiative models. In other words, the
mode propagationis not aﬀected by convectivemotions
and the convection can be seen as frozen-in .
On the contrary, increasing the Rayleigh number
leads to a more vigorous convection and the acoustic
energyratioismuchmoreaﬀectedbyconvectiveplumes(dashed green line). Indeed, after a long transient dur-
ing which it reaches a non-triﬂing value ( ∼30%), it
progressively tends to zero at long times while the con-
vective motions are responsible for the whole kinetic
energy content. The radial oscillations excited by κ-
mechanism are thus quenched by convection and this
situation is relevant to the red edge where the unstable
acoustic modes are known to be damped by convective
motions occuring at the star’s surface.
We thus have shown that the Rayleigh number is
a key parameter for this problem. But further inves-
tigations of the convection-pulsation coupling are in
progress, by especially checking time-dependent theo-
ries of convection for which several free parameters can
be constrained by such kind of direct numerical simu-
lations (e.g. Yecko, Koll´ ath, and Buchler 1998).
Acknowledgements Calculations were carried out
on the CALMIP machine of the University of Toulouse
(http://www.calmip.cict.fr/ ).
References
Baker, N., Kippenhahn, R.: Astrophys. J. 142, 868 (1965)
Baker, N.H.: In: Hillebrandt, W., Meyer-Hofmeister, E.,
Thomas, H.C. (eds.) Physical Processes in Comets, Stars
and Active Galaxies, p. 105 (1987)
Bogdan, T.J., Cattaneo, F., Malagoli, A.: Astrophys. J.
407, 316 (1993)
Bono, G., Marconi, M., Stellingwerf, R.F.: Astrophys. J.
Suppl. Ser. 122, 167 (1999)
Chandrasekhar, S.: Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic
stability. Oxford University Press: Clarendon, Oxford
(1961)
Cox, J.P.: Theory of stellar pulsation. Princeton Universi ty
Press, Princeton (1980)
Cox, J.P., Whitney, C.: Astrophys. J. 127, 561 (1958)
Dintrans, B.: Communications in Asteroseismology 158, 45
(2009)
Dintrans, B., Brandenburg, A.: A&A 421, 775 (2004)
Eddington, A.S.: The Observatory 40, 290 (1917)
Gastine, T., Dintrans, B.: Astron. Astrophys. 484, 29
(2008a)
Gastine, T., Dintrans, B.: Astron. Astrophys. 490, 743
(2008b)
Gough, D.O., Moore, D.R., Spiegel, E.A., Weiss, N.O.: As-
trophys. J. 206, 536 (1976)
Unno, W., Osaki, Y., Ando, H., Saio, H., Shibahashi, H.:
Nonradial oscillations of stars. University of Tokyo Press ,
Tokyo (1989)
Valdettaro, L., Rieutord, M., Braconnier, T., Fraysse, V.:
JCoAM 205(1), 382 (2007)
Yecko, P.A., Koll´ ath, Z., Buchler, J.R.: Astron. Astrophy s.
336, 553 (1998)
Zhevakin, S.A.: Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 1, 367
(1963)
This manuscript was prepared with the AAS L ATEX macros v5.2.