Developing Articial Herders Using Jason
Niklas Skamriis Boss, Andreas Schmidt Jensen, and Jrgen Villadsen?
Department of Informatics and Mathematical Modelling
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Abstract. This paper gives an overview of a proposed strategy for the
\Cows and Herders" scenario given in the Multi-Agent Programming
Contest 2009. The strategy is to be implemented using the Jason plat-
form, based on the agent-oriented programming language AgentSpeak.
The paper describes the agents, their goals and the strategies they should
follow. The basis for the paper and for participating in the contest is a
new course given in spring 2009 and our main objective is to show that we
are able to implement complex multi-agent systems with the knowledge
gained in an introductory course on multi-agent systems.
1 Introduction
This paper describes the work with a multi-agent system consisting of articial
herders attempting to catch cows. The agents will compete in the Multi-Agent
Programming Contest 2009 (the scenario \Cows and Herders"). One of our main
objectives in the contest has been to gain experience with the development of
multi-agent systems using Jason .
Our basis for participating in the contest is the course \Articial Intelligence
and Multi-Agent Systems" given in spring 2009 at the Technical University of
Denmark. The course provides an introduction to multi-agent systems using
Jason as the implementation platform. We hope to show that this introduction
is sucient to be able to implement a more complex multi-agent system, such
as the \Cows and Herders" scenario given in the contest.
2 System Analysis and Design
Our system consists of three kinds of agents: a herder, a scout and a leader.
The leader and the scout are basically herders with extra responsibilities. The
scout will initially explore the environment and subsequently act as an ordinary
herder. The leader will delegate targets to each of the herders { including himself.
?Contact: jv@imm.dtu.dk
1arXiv:1001.0115v1  [cs.MA]  31 Dec 2009Our system was designed using the Prometheus methodology as a guideline.
By this we mean that we have adapted relevant concepts from the methodology,
while not following it too strictly (as stated in [3]). It has allowed us to quickly
identify the goals and what agents are needed to complete them.
Fig. 1. Overview of the system.
Figure 1 gives an overview of the system. The diagram distinguishes between
the three types of agents, even though the leader and the scout are actually
special cases of the herder. This has been done to easily see the dierent roles
each agent plays. All agents know their own position and how many steps of the
match that have elapsed. This is used to revise targets, since we do not want
them to blindly follow a target. An agent gets a new target by fullling the goal
getnewtarget . The herders will tell the leader to delegate a target based on
the agents current position, while the scout will autonomously decide where to
go.
We distinguish between the following types of targets. While the agents do
not really have an understanding of each concept, it is helpful for us to be able
to tell the targets apart.
Exploration targets are targets in an area which has yet to be explored. Such
target is delegated to the scout, when he has not explored the entire envi-
ronment, or a herder, whenever he does not fulll the criteria for a receiving
another type of target.
Formation targets are targets behind cows, but within a certain distance from
both cows and other herders, so that the group of cows can be controlled
and moved (or herded) towards the corral.
2A switch target is a target next to a switch. The reason for this is that an
agent should stand next to a switch in order to trigger it. This target will
be delegated whenever an agent is near a closed switch and it is reasonable
to open it. This is the case if one or more cows are near the fence or another
agent is on one side, while having a target on the other side (thus needing
another agent to open the fence, since one agent cannot pass a fence alone).
The scenario is quite dynamic since cows are continuously moving and fences
can be opened and closed, and all of this must be taken into account.
3 Software Architecture
Our strategy and agents are implemented using the Jason platform, which is
an implementation of the AgentSpeak language, written in Java. Jason is an
eective platform for creating multi-agent systems with a variable number of
agents. Combined with internal actions, we have a strong foundation for building
a multi-agent system, which not only uses the features of logic programming, but
allows us to develop imperative extensions as well.
The use of custom architectures in Jason allows us to implement a local
simulation, as described in [1]. This eases the testing, as it can be done much
faster.
As reference implementation we have used an implementation of the 2008
contest made by the authors of Jason . This has helped us getting started, even
though the scenario diers in many ways from last year.
Our solution to the contest was developed using Eclipse. The implementation
will have great focus on the advantages of object oriented programming. This
would also ease future expansion of more agents etc. Shared memory could also
be modelled by use of references to shared objects used by multiple agents.
4 Agent Team Strategy
The agents will be moving around in a partially known environment. At the
beginning of a match everything is unknown, except for what lies within the
agents' eld of view, and as the agents move around they gain knowledge of the
environment. The entire map is represented by a graph, where each node in the
graph represents a cell in the environment. When objects such as obstacles or
cows are discovered etc. the corresponding cell in the graph will be assigned a
value of that kind of object.
When agents move around they follow paths calculated by our navigation
algorithm. We have chosen to represent the environment as a graph, since it
makes it is easy to use a graph search algorithms for navigation. The actual
paths are calculated using the A* algorithm, which basically is an advanced
best-rst search as it uses a heuristic to guide the search for optimal paths.
A part of our strategy is to try to keep clustered cows together. This means
that the agents will have to move around a group of cows to avoid splitting
3them up. This is ensured be assigning weight to the dierent cell in the graph.
By assigning higher weights to cells occupied by cows and cells adjacent to cows,
agents will navigate around a cluster instead of through it. Obstacles are handled
slightly dierent. The algorithm is implemented so that it does not consider cells
containing obstacles as valid cells for a path. This ensures that agents do not
try to move through obstacles.
To optimize the movement of our agents the paths are continuously calcu-
lated. This is done since all agents can add new knowledge of obstacles etc. to the
graph as they perceive the environment. This ensures that if one agent discovers
that a corridor is blocked, then the other agents will try to move around it to
get to their target.
Experiments have shown that it is more ecient to herd cows in groups. To
ensure this the leading agent makes great use of a clustering algorithm. The
algorithm works be examining the surroundings of each cow; adjacent cows are
grouped together.
The strategy for herding the cows will be taken care of by the leading agent.
The team leader will coordinate the herding, ensuring that the cows are eeing
the right way and that an agent will open the fence at an appropriate time.
Our strategy is mainly towards maximizing our own score. This means that
our agents will not try to capture cows already being herded by the opponent
deliberately, but it might happen if the leading agent estimates that they are
the cows closest to the corral.
An agent's beliefs consist of what they perceive and what others tell them to
believe. Optimally, we would like that every agent knows the same, i.e. they all
have the same beliefs. Unfortunately, since agents can only see a limited area of
the environment, this is not directly possible.
To ensure that every agent knows the same, any new belief an agent perceives
is sent to every other agent. All beliefs are shared immediately, since it does not
create much overhead and it is more ecient to share it than consider whether it
should be shared. When an agent discovers a static obstacle, every agent should
know this, so that their navigation can be adjusted to this new knowledge.
If an agent fails to achieve a given goal then we will use the Jason failure
handling feature. This is done by implementing a deletion event -!g, which will
be executed if a given plan fails [2]. After recovering from a failed plan, we will
attempt to reintroduce the goal ( +!g) again.
5 Discussion
Our strategy is quite dynamic because of our use of path nding and clustering
algorithms, which allow the herders to fulll their goals in any given scenario.
However, some of the choices we have made are made on assumptions which may
prove to be mistaken when the competition is held.
We have decided to have a maximum cluster size (i.e. limit the number of
cows in a single cluster), because we believe that the agents may have a hard
4time herding larger clusters. This may not be true, though, since it could be
more ecient to herd as many cows as possible as long as they are clustered.
To compute an optimal search it is important to move agents in patterns
so that the largest possible area is explored. For example, agents should never
move side by side towards the same location, since this would not exploit the full
potential of the agents' eld of view. Likewise it could prove useful to move agents
in patterns that ensures that no cow can remain undetected in the explored area.
However, we need to carefully design our algorithms so that they do not take
too long time to compute, since the duration of a turn is limited.
At the time of writing this article our implementation is complete. However,
the contest has been postponed until after the deadline of the article, so we are
unable to discuss the results. We have managed to play a single training match
against another team, which we won. This match gave us an opportunity to see
how our team plays against others.
Generally we are quite satised with our system, which is able to fulll the
goals of the scenario. Our strategy with a single leader delegating targets lead to
a less autonomous approach, but the Jason framework has allowed us to easily
implement agents with certain goals and a way to implement plans for handling
these goals.
6 Conclusion
As discussed our primary strategy will be to maximize our own score rather
than prohibiting the opposing team from scoring points. This has been done by
optimizing the search for cows and guiding the cows into the corral by using
cooperating agents. Likewise all agents will take the positions of the opponents
into account when choosing a target.
Throughout the project we have considered problems such as navigation,
search for objects using multiple start points, clustering, cooperation between
agents and multi-agent planning. All planning was implemented using Agent-
Speak, while external algorithms such as A*, our clustering algorithm and target
delegation were implemented in Java.
Despite our limited experience with AgentSpeak and programming intelli-
gent multi-agent systems, we have managed to implement a fairly reasonable
system, with agents which fulll the goals of the contest. The ability of Jason
to implement custom architectures was a great help during the work.
References
1. Rafael H. Bordini, Jomi F. H ubner, and Daniel M. Tralamazza. Developing a Team
of Gold Miners Using Jason . Springer-Verlag LNAI 4908, pages 241{245, 2008.
2. Rafael H. Bordini, Michael Wooldridge, and Jomi Fred H ubner. Programming Multi-
Agent Systems in AgentSpeak Using Jason . John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
3. Lin Padgham and Michael Winiko. Developing Intelligent Agent Systems: A Prac-
tical Guide. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
5