IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC’09) Patiala, IndiaTutoring System for Dance Learning
Rajkumar Kannan
Department of Computer Science
Bishop Heber College 
Trichy 620017, TN, INDIA
rajkumarkannan@yahoo.co.inFrederic Andres
National Institute of Informatics
University of Advanced Studies
Tokyo, JAPAN
andres@nii.ac.jpBalakrishnan Ramadoss
Department of Computer Applns
National Institute of Tech
Trichy 620015, TN, INDIA
brama@nitt.edu
Abstract - Recent advances in hardware sophistication related to 
graphics display, audio and video devices made available a large 
number of multimedia and hypermedia applications. These 
multimedia applications need to store and retrieve the different 
forms of media like text, hypertext, graphics, still images, 
animations, audio and video. Dance is one of the important 
cultural forms of a nation and dance video is one such 
multimedia types. Archiving and retrieving the required 
semantics from these dance media collections is a crucial and 
demanding multimedia application. This paper summarizes the 
difference dance video archival techniques and systems.
Keywords: Multimedia, Culture Media, Metadata archival and 
retrieval systems, MPEG-7, XML.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in hardware sophistication related to 
graphics display, audio and video devices made available a 
large number of multimedia and hypermedia applications. In a 
scenario, one may want to digitize and store one’s favorite 
dance presentations and later on view, say for instance, all solo 
dance pieces in which a particular dancerX was involved [16].
These multimedia applications need to store and retrieve 
the different forms of media like text, hypertext, graphics, still 
images, animations, audio and video. Multimedia database can 
be viewed as a controlled collection of multimedia data items. 
Multimedia database system, for instance dance video 
database, would then provide the support for multimedia data 
types, besides facilities for the creation, authoring, storage, 
access, query and control of the multimedia database.
Dance generally refers to human movements either used as 
a form of expression or presented in a social, spiritual or 
performance setting. Dance is one of the important cultural 
forms of a nation. The other cultural forms are art, music, and 
sculptures. Preserving this cultural heritage is very important 
for the future generations of dance community. This paper 
surveys the various dance video archival and retrieval systems. 
The organization of the paper is as follows: Section 2 deals 
with the dance video archival methods. The various dance 
analysis and retrieval systems are discussed in section 3. 
Section 4 deals with the challenges of Dance Analysis and 
Retrieval Systems (DARS). Finally section 5 concludes the 
paper.II. DANCE VIDEO ARCHIVAL METHODS
A dance can be archived using human memories, dance 
notations and digital mediums. In ancient times dancers passed 
the knowledge of the dance verbally to the following 
generations. However, such knowledge was limited to the 
memory of the dancers and hence many dance productions had 
been lost due to this fact unfortunately.
Encyclopedia Britannica defines a dance notation as 
the recording of dance movement through the use of written 
symbols .  Since 16thcentury, dance notations are used to 
archive choreographies and to resurrect the dance by dancers 
and choreographers. A dance notation, similar to musical notes, 
is a symbolic form of representing the movements of the 
dancers using various graphical symbols such as lines, circles, 
rectangles, squares, bars etc. 
The primary use of a dance notation is the documentation, 
analysis and reconstruction of choreography. Many different 
forms of dance notations such as stick figure have been created, 
but the two main systems used in Western culture are:
Labanotation
Benesh notation
Labanotation [1] is a standardized system for analyzing and 
recording any human movement. The original inventor is 
Rudolf von Laban (1879-1958), an important figure in 
European modern dance. He published this notation first in 
1928 as Kinetographie in the first issue of Schrifttanz . Several 
people continued the development of the notation. In 
Labanotation, it is possible to record every kind of human 
motion. Labanotation is not connected to a singular, specific 
style of dance. The basis is the natural human motion, and 
every change from this natural human motion (e.g. turned-out 
legs) has to be specifically written down in the notation as 
shown in Figs. 1-3.
Benesh [1] movement notation invented by Benesh is 
particularly prominent in ballet dance and was designed 
to write the whereabouts of a dancer on the stage, the 
direction the dancer facing, the positions of the limbs, and 
the details of the head, hand and foot. Since dancing has 
movement, Benesh also notates the movement by recording the 
paths traced by the moving limbs. Figure 4 shows an example 
of Benesh notation for the human avatar shown in Fig. 3.IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC’09) Patiala, IndiaFig.1-4. Laban and Banesh notations
A fundamental problem with Labanotation and Benesh 
notations is that very few people understand these notations 
and are experts in this field. Here the annotation process 
involves the expert to visualize the representation of the 
notation and to translate the movement to the dance learners. 
Further, these annotations exist in paper form only and no 
visual form exists.
III. DANCE VIDEO RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS
Recording mediums [2] such as VHS and DVD can provide 
a quicker and cheaper means of acquiring and storing a dance. 
However, to capture the complete stage requires a camera to be 
either set back, making the dancers very small or include close-
ups resulting parts of the dancers or choreography being 
missed or obscured. Professionally made recordings for 
televisions, video and DVD can capture many great 
productions with world-class dancers; however, the 2D camera 
viewpoint is subject to the director’s interpretation. Also, 
searching these collections of digital data to learn the dance 
movements is tedious because of the huge volume of data.
Current research in performing arts such as dance can be 
broadly divided into two categories:
Dance composition and Visualization
Dance Analysis and Retrieval
A. Dance composition and Visualization
Some researches have been conducted concerning the 
composition of dance using the notations especially 
Labanotation and Benesh [3, 4, 5, 6]. Hachimura’s system [7] 
uses markers which are placed on the body parts of the dancers 
and records 3D motion data. Hattori et al [8] developed key-
frame based dance animation software. In his approach certain 
key poses in the dance are identified and are coded in 
Labanotation.
Several graphical editors have been developed such as 
LabanEditor [7], LabanWriter for Mac OS, Calaban [9] for 
Windows, NUNTIUS [10], LED and LINTER [11] for UNIX 
systems. Further, graphical editors for Benesh notation are 
available such as MacBenesh and Benesh Notation Editor [12]. 
MacBenesh is a Macintosh application that lets us create high 
quality single dancer Benesh movement notation scores that can be saved in a document. Benesh Notation Editor is a 
Windows based application for writing benesh movement 
notation scores. It resembles a word processor thereby the 
Benesh scores can be saved in a file. Several commercial 
softwares such as LifeForms and DanceForms [13] are also 
available for composing the dance interactively. These tools 
use virtual reality features to model the movements of the 
dancers.
B. Dance Analysis and Retrieval Systems
Dance analysis and retrieval systems perform the semantic 
interpretation of the dance movements in the context of culture, 
action, gestures and emotions. A system that directly calculates 
the similarities among the body motion data is described in [7] 
(Hachimura, 2006). It considers the issue of how a similarity of 
identical body motion should be defined. 
Kalajdziski and Davcev [14] developed a system for the 
Macedonian dance videos to annotate the shots with keywords 
from the controlled vocabulary. The system consists of 
modules for segmentation, annotation, 3D dancer animation 
generation and Laban score generation.
Forouzan et al [15] designed a multimedia information 
system for the Macedonian dance annotation and the analysis 
of the dance features. Macedonian dance exists in the form of 
videos, images, audios and written commentaries. In order to 
process all these dance forms, the system includes several tools 
to extract the low level features automatically from these 
mediums. The visual tool extracts the visual features such as 
color, texture, shape, sketch, objects and their spatial 
relationships. The 3D motion tool extracts the motion 
histogram of the dancers using 3D Vicon motion capture 
system. This system captures data from the cameras and 
generates 3D motion files. Motion data are generated by 
interpolating the cameras’ traces of translucent markers placed 
on the body parts of the dancers. Audio tool extracts audio 
features like pitch, loudness and rhythm from the audio 
streams. These low level multimedia features are automatically 
annotated by the dance experts through the annotation tool.
COSMOS-7 [16] is a multimedia annotation and retrieval 
system based on MPEG-7 MDS. It includes a multimedia 
model that integrates both low level and high level features of 
the video by using multimedia frames. COSMOS-7 provides a 
conversion tool that translates M-frames into the corresponding 
MPEG-7 descriptions. 
Rajkumar et al [17,18,19,20] presented a semantic approach 
to evolve a dance video retrieval system for the Indian and 
generic dance videos. A central contribution of their research is 
the development of semantic models, annotation and authoring 
frameworks and query processing engines for the Indian and 
generic dance videos to process spatio-temporal queries. Their 
MPEG-7 based system allows the annotation experts to 
describe the metadata of the dance presentations, automatically 
generates the MPEG-7 instances and processes generic dance 
video queries. The query processor handles the dance video 
queries with the tree embedding technique. Also, XML based 
authoring and retrieval framework facilitates semantic 
annotation of the dance media descriptions, semi-automatic 
XML instance generation and query processing. The query 
IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC’09) Patiala, Indiaprocessor allows the user to submit the knowledge based dance 
video queries and handles them using tree embedding 
technique that is supported with the domain specific ontology.
IV. CHALLENGES OF DANCE VIDEO RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS
The dance analysis and retrieval systems are best regarded 
as a platform that demonstrates the feasibility of choreography 
design, dance learning, self-paced dance learning, culture 
learning and dance training. However, there are a number of 
problems yet to be solved. The strongest qualitative drawback 
of these systems is the manual annotation of the dance videos, 
thus possibly reducing the effectiveness of DARS.
Dance retrieval models have been designed with a view of 
the classical and folk dance types to describe the semantics. 
However, there are other types of dance videos such as festival 
dance videos, street dance videos etc, for which some of the 
current semantics may not be applicable and the new semantics 
have to be introduced.
Semiotic data such as mood are expressed in all dance 
retrieval systems using the controlled vocabulary of text. 
Another important drawback of these systems is the absence of 
sound. Nevertheless, sound would enhance DARS’s 
effectiveness involving the semiotic queries.
V. CONCLUSION
Dance generally refers to human movements either used as 
a form of expression or presented in a social, spiritual or 
performance setting. Dance video is one of the important types 
of multimedia resource. Since dance is the ancient cultural 
heritage, which is to be preserved for the future generations, 
archiving the dance presentations of various dance types 
becomes a necessary task. Further, adding a search, retrieval 
and faceted browsing facilities to these dance media collections 
by way of tools certainly provide the present and future dance 
trainers and learners a better eLearning environment.
REFERENCES
[1] Ann Hutchinson, G. (1984). Dance Notation: Process of recording 
movemen t. London: Dance Books.
[2] Chitra, D., Manthe, A., Nack, F., Rutledge, L., Sikora, T & Zettl, H. 
(2002). Media Semantics: Who needs it and why?. Proceedings of ACM 
Multimedia , 580-583[3] Don Herbison & Evans. (1988). Dance, Video, Notation and Computers. 
Leonardo , 21(1), 45-50.
[4] George, P. (1990). Computers and Dance: A bibliography, Leonardo , 
23(1), 87-90
[5] Calfert, T.W & Chapman, J. (1978). Notation of movement with 
computer assistance. Proceedings of ACM annual conference , 731-736
[6] Hatol, J & Kumar, V. (2005). Semantic representation and interaction of 
dance objects. Proceedings of LORNET conference , Poster
[7] Hachimura, K. (2006). Digital archiving of dancing. Review of the 
National Center for Digitization , 8, 51-66
[8] Hattori, M & Takamori, T. (2002). The description of human movement 
in computer based on movement score.  Proceedings of 41stSICE , 2370-
2371
[9] Calaban. (2002). Homepage: http://www.bham.ac.uk/calaban/frame.htm
[10] Bimas, U., Simon, W & Peter, R. (1992). NUNTIUS: A computer 
system for the interactive composition and analysis of music and dance. 
Leonardo , 25(1), 59-68
[11] LED & LINTER. (2006). An X-Windows Editor / Interpreter for 
Labanotation. http://wwwstaff.it.uts.edu.au/ don/pubs/led.html
[12] MacBenesh. (2004). Behesh notation editor for Apple Macintosh. 
http://members.rogers.com /dancewrite/macbenesh/macbenesh.htm
[13] Ilene, F. (2000). Documentation Technology for the 21st Century. 
Proceedings of World Dance Academic Conference . 137-142.
[14] Kalajdziski, S & Davcev, D. (2004). Augmented reality system interface 
for dance analysis and presentation based on MPEG-7. Proceedings of 
IASTED conference on Visualization, Imaging, and Image Processing , 
725-730
[15] Forouzan, G., Pegge, V & Park, Y.C. (2004). A multimedia information 
repository for cross cultural dance studies. Multimedia Tools and 
Applications , 24, 89-103
[16] Athanasios, C., Gkoritsas & Marios, C.A. (2005). COSMOS-7: A video 
content modeling framework for MPEG-7. Proceedings of IEEE 
MultiMediaModeling , 123-130
[17] Rajkumar, K., Ramadoss, B & Ilango, K. (2004). An approach to 
Conceptual Modeling and Extracting Expressive Semantics of Dance 
Videos. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) , 3356, 1-10. 
Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany
[18] Rajkumar, K., & Ramadoss, B (2006). Modeling and Querying the 
Expressive Semantics of Dance Videos. International Journal of 
Information and Knowledge Management (JIKM) , 5(3), 193-210. World 
Scientific, Singapore
[19] K.Rajkumar, B.Ramadoss (2007). Semi-automated annotation and 
retrieval of dance media objects. Cybernetics and Systems, Taylor and 
Francis, 38(4):349-379, PA, USA.
[20] K.Rajkumar, B.Ramadoss (2008). Modeling the dance video semantics 
using Regular Tree Automata. Fundamenta Informaticae, published 
under EATCS, IOS Press, The Netherlands. 86(1-2):175-189