arXiv:1001.0516v1  [astro-ph.EP]  4 Jan 2010Astronomy& Astrophysics manuscriptno.13065 c/circlecopyrtESO 2018
November15,2018
Lettertothe Editor
The lunar phases of dustgrains orbiting Fomalhaut
M.Min1, M.Kama2, C.Dominik2,3, and L.B.F.M.Waters2,4
1Astronomical InstituteUtrecht, Universityof Utrecht,P. O.Box80000, NL-3508 TAUtrecht,The Netherlands
2Astronomical InstituteAnton Pannekoek, Universityof Ams terdam, Kruislaan 403, 1098 SJAmsterdam, The Netherlands
3Afdeling Sterrenkunde, Radboud UniversiteitNijmegen, Po stbus 9010, 6500 GLNijmegen, The Netherlands
4Insituut voor Sterrenkunde, K.U.Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200 D,B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
Received August 5, 2009; accepted December 18, 2009
Abstract
Opticalimages of thenearby starFomalhaut show a ringof dus t orbitingthecentral star.Thisdust isinmany respects exp ectedtobe
similartothezodiacal dustinthe solarsystem.Theringdis plays aclearbrightness asymmetry, attributedtoasymmetr ic scatteringof
the centralstarlightby thecircumstellar dust grains.Rec ent measurements show thatthe bright side ofthe Fomalhaut r ingis oriented
away from us. This implies that the grains in this system scat ter most of the light in the backward direction, in sharp cont rast to the
forward-scatteringnatureofthegrainsinthesolarsystem .Inthisletter,weshowthatgrainsconsiderablylargertha nthosedominating
the solar system zodiacal dust cloud provide a natural expla nation for the apparent backward scattering behavior. In fa ct, we see the
phases of the dust grains inthe same way as we can observe the p hases of the Moon and other large solar system bodies. We outl ine
how the theory of the scattering behavior of planetesimals c an be used to explain the Fomalhaut dust properties. This ind icates that
the Fomalhaut dust ring is dominated by very large grains. Th e material orbiting Fomalhaut, which is at the transition be tween dust
andplanetesimals, can, withrespect totheir optical behav ior, best be described as micro-asteroids.
Key words. Keywords should be given
1. Introduction
Optical images of some nearby stars show the presence of
orbiting solid material through the starlight it scatters ( e.g
Kalasetal., 2005). This has been interpreted as evidence of an
evolvingplanetarysystem.Collisionsbetweenlargebodie ssuch
as asteroids are believed to be responsible for the producti on
of these small solid particles. This is similar to our own so-
lar system, in which interplanetary dust grains are found th at
are thought to originate from asteroids and comets. The size
and chemical composition of these grains determine the way i n
which they reﬂect starlight. Laboratorymeasurementsand l ight
scattering theoryshow that small solid particlesscatter m ost in-
cident light in the forward direction, in agreement with ast ro-
nomical observations. However, recent observations of the dust
orbitingthe nearbystar Fomalhauthaveshown forthe ﬁrst ti me
that the grains in this system scatter most of the light in the
backward direction (LeBouquinet al., 2009). This is in shar p
contrast with the current understanding of light scatterin g and
challengesthe analogybetween interplanetarydust and the dust
observedin Fomalhaut.In this paper, we show that an excelle nt
matchtotheobservedbackscatteringbehaviorofthemateri alor-
bitingFomalhautcanbeobtainedbyusingthetheoryofregol ith
coveredsurfaces.
2. Apparentbackward scattering
The circumstellar ring of Fomalhaut as observedby the Hubbl e
space telescope clearly shows a dark side and a bright side
(Kalaset al., 2005). Regarding the orientation of the ring, the
general forward scattering behavior of dust grains has led t o
Send oﬀprint requests to : M. Min, e-mail:M.Min@uu.nlthe conclusion that the bright side of the ring should be the
onetilted towardsthe observer.Using theVeryLargeTelesc ope
Interferometer (VLTI), the rotation axis of the central sta r and
subsequently the inclination axis of the system was inferre d
(LeBouquinetal., 2009). This inclination is opposite to pr e-
vious assumption in that the direction of scattering is reve rsed
fromforward-dominatedtobackward-dominated.Thiscontr asts
withthe currentconsensusintheﬁeld oflightscattering.
Arelativelysimpleexplanationforthiscanbefoundbycon-
sidering bodies much larger than interplanetary dust grain s. As
an example let us take the Moon, which for all practical pur-
posescan beconsidereda giganticdust grain.However,it is ev-
ident that the Moon is bright when viewed in a backward scat-
tering situation (full Moon) and it is dark in the forward sca t-
tering case (new Moon). The question then arises: is the Moon
truly backscattering?The answer is “no”. The apparentsurp rise
that the Moon is forward scattering is caused by the sharp and
in most cases invisible di ﬀraction peak it causes. For the Moon
this diﬀraction spike, caused by interference e ﬀects due to the
shadow of the Moon, is so narrowly forward peaked that it can
onlybeseenintheforward-mostfractionofadegree1,i.e.when
the Sunis rightbehindthe Moon.Forall practicalpurposes, the
Moonappearsto bebackscattering,anddi ﬀractioncanbeomit-
ted.
For smaller grains, the di ﬀraction spike often dominatesthe
overallscatteringbehavioroverabroaderrangeofscatter ingan-
gles. It appears that the disk around Fomalhaut contains dus t
grains that behave backward-reﬂecting like asteroidal bod ies.
This must be because the grains are very large, making the
diﬀraction spike so narrowly forward-peaked that it is outside
1For objects the size of the Moon, the di ﬀracted energy at visible
wavelengths isconﬁned towithinthe forward-most µ-arcsecond.2 M. Min etal.:The lunar phases of dust grains orbitingFomal haut
Figure1. Angularscattering functionsforthe regolithparticles,
showing the relative intensity scattered at a scattering an gleθ.
The pure reﬂectance function (solid, black curve) is given, and
diﬀractioneﬀectsare addedforparticleswith a narrowsize dis-
tribution around 3µm grains (dashed curve). The exact scatter-
ing function for this narrow size distribution of spheres as ob-
tainedfromtheMietheoryisalso shown(solid,greycurve).
theobservablerangeofangles.FortheFomalhautsystem,wh ich
has an inclination of 25◦, the range of observablescattering an-
gles is 25◦<θ<155◦. Kalasetal. (2005) already noted that
the apparent single scattering albedo of the dust grains is i n the
rangeof5−10%,whichislowforanykindofdustgrains.Such
values are more typical for the geometric albedo of asteroid s.
The geometric albedo of asteroids does not include the contr i-
bution from diﬀraction. For large grains, it is easily shown that
when diﬀraction is included, the single scattering albedo is al-
ways larger than 50% (vande Hulst, 1957, Chapter 12). Thus,
the true single scattering albedo of the grains, averaged ov er all
angles and including di ﬀraction, must be much higher than the
observedvalue, indicating that most of the scattered light is not
detected.
3. Modelingthescatteringfunctionofasteroidal
bodies
Below we treat the dust grains in the Fomalhaut system as
micro-asteroids, meaning that we use the theory of reﬂectan ce
by regolith-coveredasteroidal surfacesto computetheir s catter-
ingbehavior.Forthereﬂectanceofasteroidalsurfaces,we usean
analyticalmodelforthebidirectionalreﬂectance(Hapke, 1981).
Forsimplicityweusethetheoryomittinge ﬀectsofmacroscopic
roughness as discussed in Hapke (1984). This basically mean s
that we set the macroscopic roughness parameter as discusse d
in that paper to zero. In addition to this, we ignore the oppo-
sition eﬀect. This mainly plays a role near backward-scattering
and thus largely falls outside the range of scattering angle s that
wehaveaccesstointheFomalhautsystem.Tointegrateovert he
surfaceofthe body,weuse MonteCarlo raytracing.
3.1. The regolithparticles
Asinputinthesecomputations,weneedtoknowthealbedoand
angular scattering function for the regolith particles tha t cover
thesurfaceofthegrain.Notethatsincetheregolithpartic lesare
closely packed, we need to know these parameters omitting th e
contributionfromdi ﬀraction(Hapke,1981).Thecontributionof
diﬀractioncan be separated when we computethe angular scat-
tering function and single scattering albedo using geometr ical
optics. More exact computational methods like the Mie theor y
do not allow the separation of the contributionfrom di ﬀraction.
Wethusassumetheregolithparticlesarelargeenoughsotha tge-ometricalopticscanbeapplied,andinadditionweonlycons ider
surface reﬂections, i.e. transmitted rays are ignored. We r ealize
that using geometrical optics is a rough approximation for t he
grainsizes we areconsidering.Nevertheless,since we arei nter-
estedonlyintheoverallshapeoftheangularscatteringfun ction
mostly at intermediate scattering angles, the approximati on is
not so bad for grain sizes a few times the wavelength of radia-
tion, especially for particles with a considerable imagina ry part
of the refractive index (Wielaardet al., 1997). In this appr oxi-
mation the scattering propertiesof the particlesare indep endent
oftheirsize andshapeaslongastheyhaveaconvexsurface.T o
compute the reﬂections we need to specify the refractive ind ex
of the regolith particles which we take to be m=1.6+0.1i,
thought to be typical for cosmic materials. However, we ﬁnd
that the ﬁnal result is hardly inﬂuenced by modest variation s
in the refractive index (with the real part ∼1.5−1.8 and the
imaginary part/lessorsimilar0.3). The angular scattering function for the
regolithparticleswhichresultsfromthisisdominantlyfo rward-
scattering, while their single scattering albedo is 11% (om itting
diﬀraction). In Fig. 1 we show three di ﬀerent curves: the angu-
lar scattering function omitting di ﬀraction (solid, black curve),
the angular scattering function with added contribution fr om
diﬀraction by a narrow size distribution of spheres with diam-
etersaround3µm(dashedcurve),andthefullangularscattering
functioncomputedusingtheMietheoryforthisnarrowsized is-
tribution(solid,greycurve).All curvesare plottedasa fu nction
ofthescatteringangle,i.e.0◦isforward-scatteringwhile180◦is
backward-scattering. Note that the curve obtained using re ﬂec-
tionplusdiﬀractionisquitesimilartothatobtainedusingthefull
Mie theory.It can be argued that 3 µm is rather large for the re-
golith particles coveringthe grains we discuss below. Howe ver,
itdoesallowthegrainstobecoveredbyorcomposedoftheser e-
golith particles. The parametersderivedaboveare used as i nput
for the optical properties of the regolith particles in the H apke
theory.
3.2. The grainsasa whole
Theresultingsinglescatteringpropertiesoftheregolith particles
obtained in the previous paragraph are inserted into the Hap ke
theory. Note that we use the theory in its most simple form, i. e.
we ignore eﬀects of macroscopic roughness and the opposition
eﬀect.In thatcase, theonlyremainingparametersare thesing le
scattering albedo and the angular scattering function of th e re-
golith particles obtained above.As we will show below, we ca n
ﬁndanalmostperfectﬁtwithoutconsideringadditionalpar ame-
tersonmacroscopicroughnessandoppositione ﬀect.Thismeans
that using only the measurements available so far, we cannot
constrainthemanddecidedtousethemostsimpleformthatca n
still reproduce the observations. Much more accurate obser va-
tions of the angular scattering function of the Fomalhaut gr ains
areneededtocompareallHapkeparameterstothosederivedf or,
forexample,theMoonorsolarsystem asteroids.
In Fig. 2 we show the resulting angular scattering function
of the model Fomalhaut dust grains. The curves show the rel-
ative intensity scattered at an angle θ. The grey area indicates
the observablerangeofscatteringanglesforthe Fomalhaut sys-
tem.NotethatthegrainswesimulateusingtheHapketheorya p-
pear to be predominantlybackward-scattering(we see the cr es-
cents of the grains), while the small regolith particles cov ering
the surface of these larger grains are predominantly forwar d-
scattering, as discussed above. The angular scattering fun ction
resultingfromonlyusingtheHapkereﬂectancetheory,i.e. with-
out including diﬀraction, is shown by the long dashed line. ToM. Min etal.:The lunar phases of dust grains orbitingFomalh aut 3
Figure2. Angularscatteringfunctionsforlargedustgrains,showin gtherelativeintensityscatteredatascatteringangle θ.Thepure
reﬂectance function (long-dashed curve) is given, and di ﬀraction eﬀects are added for 10, 30 and 100 µm grains (dotted, dashed
and solid curves). The empirical scattering function of the Fomalhaut disk grains from Kalasetal. (2005) is also shown ( thick
grey curve, albedo chosen to match the computations). The gr ey area indicates the observable range of scattering angles for the
Fomalhautsystem.
simulate the ﬁnite size of the dust grains, we added the con-
tribution from diﬀraction using a diameter of the grains of 10,
30 and 100µm in dotted, dashed and solid lines, respectively.
For the diﬀraction, we took simple Fraunhofer di ﬀraction by
a spherical aperture. To get rid of the resonance structures as-
sociated with Fraunhofer di ﬀraction, averaging was performed
over a narrow size distribution (a ﬂat distribution from 0.8 to
1.2 times the average size). Grains of 100 µm diameter clearly
ﬁt the best to the empirical angular scattering function (sh own
by the thickgrayline) in agreementwith Dentetal. (2000). F or
theobservedscatteringfunctionofthegrainsorbitingFom alhaut
we used the Henyey-Greenstein parameterization obtained b y
Kalasetal. (2005), where we simply switched the forward and
backwardscatteringdirections,i.e.switchingtheasymme trypa-
rametergfrom+0.2to−0.2.Theangularscatteringfunctionob-
tainedinthiswaywasmultiplicativelyscaledtomatchthec om-
putations. This scaling factor gives the single scattering albedo
ofthegrains.Wefoundthatwhenweintegratedtheangularsc at-
tering function resulting from the Hapke theory over the ang les
accessible in the Fomalhautsystem (the area indicated in gr ay),
the albedo of the grains averaged over the observable range o f
angles is 5%. This is consistent with the low albedo found by
Kalasetal. (2005).
If we consider the assumptions on the regolith particles and
the Hapke theory it is clear that the model we present is quite
rough.However,aﬁrmoutcomeofthemodelisthatfortherang e
ofscatteringanglesweobservethescatteringisdominated byre-
ﬂectionratherthanbydi ﬀraction.Thisimplies,asshownabove,
thatthegrainsarelargerthan100 µmindiameter.Thisoutcome
doesnotdependontheassumptionsinthemodelandistherefo re
a solidconclusion.
4. Conclusion
We conclude that the scattering surface in the disk around
Formalhautisdominatedbygrainsofatleast100 µminsize.Our
ﬁndingsagreewiththefactthattheinfraredspectrumisfea ture-
less (Stapelfeldtetal., 2004),indicatingthat grainssma llerthanafewmicronareheavilydepletedinthesystem.Also,Dentet al.
(2000)ﬁndthatlargegrainsdominatethethermalemission. Itis
remarkable that such large grains are observed directly in o pti-
cal light in an astronomical object. The reason for this is th at
while the dust mass in many systems is dominated by large
grains (see e.g. Wilneretal., 2005; Testi etal., 2003), the y are
normallyover-shonebyacomponentofsmallgrains.Thiscom -
ponent,thoughlessmassive,dominatestheopticalcrossse ction,
and therefore appearance, of the disk. The fact that very lar ge
grains are so visible on a global scale in the Formalhaut disk
meansthatsmallgrainshavebeencleanedoutfromthisdiske x-
tremely eﬃciently, and that all there is left are these very large
grains,directlyprobedbyreﬂectedstellar light.
We concludethat we are observingthe transition part of pa-
rameterspace,goingfromdustscatteringtoplanetesimalr eﬂec-
tion. In fact, one might conclude that, almost 400 years afte r
Galileo observed the crescent of Venus, we are seeing the cre s-
centsofthelargedustgrainsin thediskaroundFomalhaut.
Acknowledgements. We are indebted to the referee, Ludmilla Kolokolova, for
constructive comments leading to asigniﬁcant improvement of the paper.
References
Dent, W. R. F., Walker, H. J., Holland, W. S., & Greaves, J. S. 2 000, MNRAS,
314, 702
Hapke, B.1981, J.Geophys. Res., 86, 3039
Hapke, B.1984, Icarus, 59, 41
Kalas, P.,Graham, J.R.,&Clampin, M. 2005, Nature, 435,106 7
LeBouquin, J.-B.,Absil, O.,Benisty, M.,et al. 2009, A&A,4 98, L41
Stapelfeldt, K.R.,Holmes, E.K.,Chen, C.,et al. 2004, ApJS ,154, 458
Testi, L.,Natta, A.,Shepherd, D.S.,&Wilner, D.J.2003, A& A,403, 323
vandeHulst,H.C.1957,LightScattering bySmallParticles (NewYork:Wiley)
Wielaard, D. J., Mishchenko, M. I., Macke, A., & Carlson, B. E . 1997,
Appl. Opt.,36, 4305
Wilner, D. J., D’Alessio, P., Calvet, N., Claussen, M. J., & H artmann, L. 2005,
ApJ,626, L109