 1 Highly efficient acceleration and collimation of hi gh-density plasma using  
laser-induced cavity pressure  
 
J. Badziak 1a) , S. Borodziuk 1, T. Pisarczyk 1, T. Chodukowski 1, E. Krousky 2, K. Masek 2,  
J. Skala 2, J. Ullschmied 2, Yong-Joo Rhee 3,  
1 Institute of Plasma Physics and Laser Microfusion, 01-497 Warsaw, Poland  
2 PALS Research Centre ASCR, 18200 Prague 8, Czech Re public 
3 KAERI, Daejeon, 305 – 353 Korea  
A novel efficient scheme of acceleration and collim ation of dense plasma is proposed and 
examined. In the proposed scheme, a target placed i n a cavity at the entrance of a guiding 
channel is irradiated by a laser beam introduced in to the cavity through a hole and accelerated 
along the channel by the pressure created and accum ulated in the cavity by the hot plasma 
expanding from the target and the cavity walls. Usi ng 1.315- µm, 0.3-ns laser pulse of energy 
up to 200J and  a thin CH target,  it was shown tha t the forward accelerated dense plasma 
projectile produced from the target can be effectiv ely guided and collimated in the 2-mm 
cylindrical guiding channel and the energetic effic iency of acceleration in this scheme is an 
order of magnitude higher than in the case of conve ntional ablative acceleration.  
 
The ablative pressure of expanding plasma produced at 
the interaction of laser or X-ray radiation with th e outer 
layer of a fusion target is commonly used to accele rate 
and compress DT fuel in all currently considered 
approaches to inertial confinement fusion (ICF) [1,  2]. 
The ablative acceleration (AA) has also been propos ed to 
be used to accelerate a macroparticle to hyperveloc ity to 
ignite the fuel in the impact fast ignition (IFI) f usion 
scheme [3, 4] as well as for other, non-fusion 
applications [5]. The energetic efficiency of accel eration, 
ηacc , defined as the ratio of kinetic energy of the 
accelerated target to energy of radiation used for the 
acceleration (producing the ablating plasma in case  of 
AA), is limited by two factors: the absorption coef ficient 
of radiation in the plasma, ηabs , and the hydrodynamic 
efficiency, ηh. Even for a short-wavelength radiation 
(e.g. a 3 ω beam of Nd:glass laser), for which these 
coefficients can be relatively high ( ηabs   
≤ 70 – 80%, ηh ~ 10 – 20% [1, 2]), the efficiency 
ηacc  = ηabs  ηh   is rather low:  ηacc ≤ 7 – 16%. Actually,  a 
total acceleration efficiency t
acc η– which also takes into 
account the energy conversion efficiency, ηc, from the 
primary laser beam (e.g. a 1 ω Nd:glass laser beam) to 
the short-wavelength radiation (a 3 ω beam, X-rays) – is 
yet lower, and for the Nd:glass laser t
acc η= ηacc ηc ≤ 4 – 
8%, since, usually, ηc ≤ 50%. One of the important 
consequences of the low energetic efficiency of 
acceleration is very high laser energy required for  high-
gain laser fusion [1, 2, 6]. 
Fortunately, AA is not the only possible laser 
method of acceleration of macroparticles or fusion 
plasmas. About 30 years ago, a cannonball-like 
acceleration mechanism was proposed to compress a 
spherical fusion target [7] and its high energetic  
 
a) E-mail: badziak@ifpilm.waw.pl   efficiency was revealed [7, 8]. In its original for m, 
applied in firearms, this mechanism employs the 
pressure produced in a closed cavity by chemical 
explosives to accelerate a projectile e.g. in a can non. In 
the case of cannonball-like acceleration driven by a 
laser, the pressure accelerating  a projectile (a t arget) is 
created in the cavity by the plasma ablating from t he 
laser-irradiated target placed in the cavity [7 – 9 ] . Such 
a kind of acceleration can be referred to as laser- induced 
cavity pressure acceleration (LICPA). Though, for m any 
reasons, the use of LICPA for effective spherical 
compression of a fusion target is questionable, LIC PA 
has still a great potential to be successfully used  for other 
fusion geometries and/or schemes (e.g. for IFI fusi on 
[3]) as well as for some non-fusion applications .  
In this paper, a highly efficient scheme of 
acceleration and collimation of dense plasma using 
LICPA is proposed and experimental results 
demonstrating its very high energetic efficiency ar e 
presented.  
 
 
Fig.1. A scheme of laser-driven accelerator using L ICPA (see the text). 
 
In the proposed scheme (Fig. 1), a projectile place d 
in a cavity at the entrance of the guiding channel is 
irradiated by a laser beam through a small hole in the 
cavity wall and accelerated along the channel by th e 
pressure produced and accumulated in the cavity by the 
hot plasma expanding from the irradiated part of th e 
projectile (from the ablator) and from the cavity w alls. 
An important part of the scheme (not considered in 
previously proposed LICPA schemes) is the guiding  2 channel, which plays a role similar to that of a ba rrel in a 
conventional cannon. In particular, it prevents an 
“escape” of the pressure from the cavity (which all ows 
for acceleration of the projectile for a long time)  and, 
moreover, it makes it possible to collimate and com press 
the accelerated plasma.  
The motion of a projectile in the cylindrical, 
one-dimensional LICPA accelerator without losses ca n 
be described by the equation:  
p
dt zdσ22
= ,     (1) 
where p is the pressure in the cavity, σ is the areal mass 
density of the projectile and z is the position of the 
projectile measured from its initial position. The cavity 
volume changes during the projectile acceleration a s 
(Fig.1): V c = S c [L c+(1+ σ/Σ)z], where L c is the initial 
cavity length, S c is the projectile (cavity) area, and Σ is 
the areal mass density of the cavity wall. Assuming  that 
the pressure in the cavity changes adiabatically wi th an 
increase in the volume, we arrive at the equation:  
[ ]γσ )c0
22
)(z/L / (1 1p
dt zdσ
Σ++= ,    (2) 
where ) 1 )( /( − = γcca
L LSE0p  is the initial pressure in the 
cavity, a
LE is the laser energy absorbed in the cavity and 
γ is the adiabatic exponent. In practical units, the  initial 
pressure can be written as ca
LL F/) 1 (10 − ≈ γ0p  , [bar, 
J/cm 2, cm], where ca
La
L SE F / =  is the laser energy 
fluence in the cavity. From this equation, the foll owing 
expressions for the projectile velocity and the 
hydrodynamic efficiency as a function of the distan ce z 
of acceleration can be derived:  
[ ]2 / 11
max )/ 1 (1γ−+− =czz vv    (3) 
 
[ ]γη η−+− =1 max )/ 1 (1c h h zz    (4) 
where:  
1 max 2 / 1
max )/ 1 ( ,)/ 1 (2−Σ += 



Σ += σ ησ σha
LFv,  (5) 
and z c = L c(1+ σ/Σ)-1. It can be seen from (5) that in the 
case σ << Σ (the areal mass density of the projectile is 
much smaller than that of the cavity wall), almost all 
laser energy absorbed in the cavity can be transfor med in 
the projectile kinetic energy and the hydrodynamic 
efficiency  of acceleration can approach 1, thus it  can be 
significantly higher than in the case of ablative 
acceleration.  
The experiment aimed to demonstrate efficient 
acceleration and collimation of dense plasma in the  
proposed scheme was performed at the PALS laser 
facility [10] in Prague. Both the cavity and the ch annel 
of the accelerator were hollowed-out in the massive  Al 
cylinder and their length (L c, LCh ) and diameters (d c, d Ch ) 
were equal to: L c = 0.1mm, L Ch  = 2mm, d c = d Ch  = 0.3mm (Fig. 2). The diameter of the hole in the cav ity 
wall was d hole  = 0.18 mm and the  thickness  of  this  wall 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. A simplified scheme of the experimental set -up (out of scale). 
 
was 0.1mm. A 10- µm polystyrene (CH) foil placed at the 
channel entrance was irradiated by a 1.315 µm, 0.3-ns 
laser pulse of energy up to 200 J and intensity up to 
10 15 W/cm 2 injected into the cavity through the hole. The 
parameters of the forward-accelerated part of the f oil 
(actually – the dense CH plasma), playing the role of a 
projectile, were measured either in configuration M  or N 
(Fig. 2). The volume of the crater produced in the Al 
massive target at the output of the channel (config uration 
M) was assumed to be a measure of energy deposited in 
the target by forward moving dense plasma and three -
frame interferometry [11] as well as ion diagnostic s (ion 
charge collectors) [12] (configuration N) were used  to 
estimate the plasma velocity and temperature. The 
results of the measurements performed in the LICPA 
scheme, in particular, the measurements of the crat er 
volume and depth, were compared to the ones obtaine d 
for the AA scheme (CH foil accelerated in the chann el 
without the use of the cavity) as well as for a dir ect laser-
Al target interaction.  
The pictures of the craters and the replicas of the  
craters produced in the Al target in the LICPA sche me, 
the AA scheme and the L-T scheme (the direct laser- Al 
target interaction) – obtained at the same laser be am 
parameters – are shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen th at the 
craters produced with LICPA are considerably larger  and 
deeper than in the case of AA or L-T.  
A quantitative comparison of the volume and depth 
of craters produced in the LICPA, AA and L-T scheme s 
is presented in Figs. 4 and 5. The laser intensity values 
marked in the figures were calculated assuming 
  3   
 
 
Fig. 3. Craters produced in the Al target by a dire ct laser-target interaction (L-T) as well as by hig h-density plasma driven by LICPA or ablative 
acceleration (AA) and guided in the cylindrical cha nnel. E L ≈ 130 J, τL = 0.3 ns, I L ≈ 8 × 10 14  W/cm 2, L Ch = 2mm,  d Ch  = 0.3mm.  
 
 
 
Fig.4. The volume of the craters produced in the Al  target by a direct 
laser-target interaction  (L–T) as well as   by hig h-density plasma 
accelerated in the cylindrical channel by LICPA or AA as a function of 
laser energy (intensity). Note that the crater volu me produced by AA or  
L – T is magnified 10 times in the figure. L Ch = 2mm, d Ch  = 0.3mm.  
 
that all laser energy (focused to h
Ld ≈ 0.5 d hole ) was 
injected into the cavity through the hole in the LI CPA 
scheme. The volume of the craters produced in the A l 
target by high-density plasma accelerated in the LI CPA 
scheme is more than 30 times greater than that for the 
AA scheme and 12 – 15 times greater than in the cas e of 
direct laser-target interaction. The crater volume for the 
LICPA scheme increases approximately linearly with an 
increase in laser energy and the saturation, seen i n the 
plot for the AA scheme, does not appear in the 
considered energy range. As the crater volume is a 
measure of the energy deposited in the target and, 
indirectly, a measure of the kinetic energy of the 
forward-accelerated plasma, these results demonstra te 
that the energetic efficiency of acceleration ( ηacc ) in the 
LICPA scheme is significantly (an order of magnitud e) 
higher than in the case of ablative acceleration. A lso, the 
energy fluence of the plasma accelerated in the LIC PA 
scheme is remarkably higher than that in the AA sch eme, 
which results in a few times greater crater depth ( Fig. 5).  
 
 
Fig.5. The depth of the craters produced in the Al target by high-
density plasma accelerated in the cylindrical chann el by LICPA or AA 
or by a direct laser-target interaction (L – T) as a function o laser 
energy (intensity). L Ch = 2mm, d Ch  = 0.3mm.  
 
It should be underlined that, as it results from ou r 
measurements, using a guiding channel in the LICPA 
scheme is of key importance for production of a fas t and 
dense plasma bunch since it ensures both efficient 
acceleration and collimation of the plasma. We have  
observed that in the case of employing LICPA withou t 
the channel, a very shallow crater or no crater was  
produced in the Al target placed at distances from the 
CH foil comparable to the channel length (1or 2mm).  It 
indicates that in such a case the energy accumulate d in 
the cavity is finally dispersed in a large angle li ke in the 
case of using AA for the foil acceleration in free space 
[13] .  
The three-frame interferometry using the 2 ω PALS 
laser beam reveals that, at laser energy ~ 130 J, t he 
forward-accelerated plasma covers the distance of 
2 mm in ~10 – 15 ns in the channel (Fig. 6), which 
means that the average plasma velocity in the chann el is 
<v> ~ (1.5 – 2) ×10 7cm/s. This velocity was found to be 
comparable to the velocity of a plasma jet of relat ively 
low electron density (~10 18  – 10 20  cm -3) observed at  
the channel  output  in  the  AA  scheme  [13].  Ho wever,   
L - T  LICPA  
AA   4 
 
Fig. 6. Interferograms of plasma accelerated in the  LICPA accelerator 
recorded at the output of the cylindrical channel. EL ≈ 130 J, 
τL = 0.3 ns, I L ≈ 8 × 10 14  W/cm 2, L Ch = 2mm,  d Ch  = 0.3mm.  
 
contrary to the AA case, such a plasma jet was not 
recorded in the LICPA scheme. As it results from ou r 
numerical simulations using 1D HYDES code, a 
plausible reason for this difference is the signifi cantly 
higher density of plasma in the LICPA scheme caused  
by additional strong plasma compression by the pres sure 
accumulated in the cavity.  
The observed high energetic efficiency of 
acceleration in the LICPA scheme is a consequence o f 
high hydrodynamic efficiency and high laser radiati on 
absorption in the cavity which are higher than in t he case 
of AA or direct L-T interaction. The higher absorpt ion 
results from the fact that a significant part of la ser 
radiation scattered and reflected back by the ablat ive 
plasma can be confined in the cavity and its energy  can 
be transformed in the ablative pressure of the plas ma 
expanding from the irradiated cavity walls. When th e 
area of the hole in the cavity wall is much smaller  than 
the area of the cavity walls, almost all laser radi ation can 
be absorbed in the cavity. In addition, soft X-rays  and 
fast ions emitted from the plasma, which normally a re a 
source of plasma energy loss, are absorbed in the c avity 
and contribute to the cavity pressure production. F or the 
cavity geometry used in our experiment we can expec t 
that the cavity absorption coefficient is ηabs ~ 0.5 – 0.7. 
Taking ηabs  = 0.6 and moreover: σCH  ≈ 1.1 × 10 -3g/cm 2, 
ΣAl  ≈ 2.7 ×10 -2g/cm 2, L c= 0.1 mm, d c= 0.3 mm, E L = 
130 J, from expressions (5) we obtain for the LICPA  
scheme: max 
hη ≈ 0.96,  v max  ≈ 4.4 × 10 7cm/s and, 
moreover, p o ≈ 73 Mbar. Assuming z = L Ch = 2mm and  
γ = 5/3, from (3) and (4) we obtain v ≈ 4.2 × 10 7cm/s and 
ηh ≈ 0.86 for the channel output, which result in the 
acceleration efficiency ηacc  = ηabs ηh ≈ 0.52 and the 
average velocity in the channel <v> ≈ 3.6×10 7cm/s. The 
last value is a factor 2 higher than the value esti mated 
from the measurement, likely due to simplicity of t he 
model which, in particular, does not take into acco unt 
any energy losses in the considered LICPA accelerat or.  
 
 
 
 
 
 In conclusion, a novel efficient scheme of high-
density plasma acceleration and collimation using l aser-
induced cavity pressure has been proposed and 
demonstrated. Due to higher hydrodynamic efficiency  
and higher absorption of laser radiation in the cav ity the 
energetic efficiency of acceleration in this scheme  can be 
an order of magnitude greater than in the case of t he 
conventional ablative acceleration using the “rocke t 
effect”. The proposed LICPA accelerator has a poten tial 
to be highly useful for fusion-related applications  (e.g. 
for IFI fusion) as well as for other fields of rese arch such 
as high energy-density physics, laboratory astrophy sics 
or material processing.  
 
This work was supported in part by the HiPER projec t 
under Grant Agreement No 211737.  The experiment was 
performed within the Access to Research Infrastruct ure 
activity in the Seventh Framework Programme of the EU 
(Contract No 212025, Laserlab Europe-Continuation)  
 
1. A. Atzeni and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, Physics of Iner tial Fusion,  
    Clarendon Press, Oxford (2004).  
2. J. Lindl, Phys. Plasmas 2,  3933 (1995).  
3. M. Murakami and Nagatomo, Nucl. Inst. Meth. Phys . Res. A 544 , 67  
    (2005). 
4. H. Azechi, T. Sakaiya, T. Watari, M. Karasik, H.  Saito K. Takeda,  
    H. Hosoda, H. Shiraga, M. Nakai, K. Shigemori, S. Fujioka, M.  
    Murakami, H. Nagatomo, T. Johzaki, J. Gardner, D. G. Colombant,  
    J. W. Bates, A.L. Velikovich, Y. Aglitskiy,  J.  Weaver, S.  
    Obenschain, S.Eliezer, R. Kodama, T. Norimatsu,  H. Fujita, K.  
    Mima, and H. Kan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 , 235002 (2009).  
5. S. Borodziuk and S. Kostecki, Laser Part. Beams 8, 241 (1990).  
6. E. I. Moses, Nucl. Fusion 49 , 104022 (2009).  
7. H. Azechi, N. Miyanaga, S. Sakabe, T. Yamanaka, and Ch.  
    Yamanaka, Jap. J. Appl. Phys. 20 , L477 (1981).  
8. K. Yamada, M. Yagi, H. Nishimura, F. Matsuoka, H . Azechi, T.  
    Yamanaka, and Ch. Yamanaka, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 51 , 280 (1982).  
9. S. Borodziuk, A. Kasperczuk, T. Pisarczyk, J. Ba dziak, T.  
    Chodukowski, J. Ullschmied, E. Krokusy, K. Mase k, M. Pfeifer,  
    K. Rohlena, J. Skala, and P. Pisarczyk, Appl. P hys. Lett. 95 , 231501  
    (2009).  
10. K. Jungwirth, A. Cejnarova, L. Juha, B. Kraliko va, J. Krasa, E.  
     Krousky, P. Krupickova,  L. Laska, K. Masek, A . Prag, O. Renner,  
     K. Rohlena, B. Rus, J. Skala, P. Straka, and J . Ullschmied, Phys.  
     Plasmas 8, 2495 (2001).  
11. A. Kasperczuk, T. Pisarczyk, S. Borodziuk, J. U llschmied, E.  
      Krousky, K. Masek, K. Rohlena,  J. Skala, and  H. Hora, Phys  
     Plasmas 13 , 062704 (2006).  
12. J. Badziak, J. Makowski, P. Parys, L. Ry ć, J. Wołowski, E.  
     Woryna, and A.B. Vankov, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phy s. 34 , 1885 (2001).  
13. J. Badziak, T. Pisarczyk, T. Chodukowski, A. Ka sperczuk, P.  
      Parys, M. Rosi ński,  J. Wołowski, E. Krousky, J. Krasa, K. Mašek, 
      M. Pfeifer, J. Skala, J. Ullschmied, A. Velyh an, L. J. Dhareshwar,  
      N.K. Gupta, Yong-Joo Rhee, L. Torrisi, and P.  Pisarczyk. Phys.  
      Plasmas 16 , 114506 (2009).  
 
 
 
 
 