The  Boundary  Conditions  Geometry  in  
Lattice-Ising  model 
 
You-gang Feng 
 
Department of Basic Science, College of Scien ce, Gui Zhou University. Cai Jia Guan, Guiyang 
550003, China 
E-mail: ygfeng45@yahoo.com.cn 
 
 
   We found that the differential topology of the lattice-system of Ising model 
determines whether there can be the cont inuous phase transition , the geometric 
topology of the space the latt ice-system is embedded in determines whether the 
system can become ordered. If the system  becomes ordered it may not admit the 
continuous phase transition. The spin-projection orie ntations are strongly influenced 
by the geometric topology of the spac e the lattice-system is embedded in.  
 
Keywords:  Ising model, periodic boundary, sp in-projection orientation, topology  
PACS: 64.60. Cn, 05.50.+q, 02.40.Pc 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Physicists worked on Ising models for many years have obtained brilliant 
achievements in the theory of  continuous phase transition. The model’s charm is that 
the studying and researching will never be  at an end; some  new properties and 
problems will be discovered and explored. Kadanoff pointed out, “The physical problem of critical phenomena reduces to the mathematical problem of enumerating 
and describing the different universality class.”
[]1 The late Chinese mathematician 
Xing-sheng Chen, well-known for his great achievements in differential topology 
around the world, said, “Physics ju st is geometry, and they ar e in one family.” In this 
paper we will discuss how the difference be tween differential and geometric topology 
influences on the magnetic order of the lattice system of Ising model. 
   
2. Applications 
 
It used to be that the discussion about th e continuous phase transition of Ising model 
is concentrated on the property of derivatives of order 2 of the system’s free energy at 
 1the critical temperature. If it is divergen t the system will have magnetic order below 
the critical temperature, if it is not divergent the ordered stat e of system will not 
appear. If we regard the thermodynamic proper ties of the system as a kind of manifold, 
and the system’s free energy is a functi on defined in the coordinate system.  
The property of derivatives of order 2 of the free energy reflects the differential  
topology of the manifold. The phase transi tions of the systems with  the same 
differential topology belong to one kind of pha se transitions—a phase transition of the 
second kind. The order parameters are actually  the invariance linked to the differential 
topology of such systems. C onsequently, the discussion about the phase transition of 
the Ising model has a meaning in terms of  differential topology, although people did 
not pay much attention to relate the pha se-transition property to the property of 
differential topology, and were willing to cons ider it as a physical property only. As a 
result of this, they were so indifferent to the geometric topological property of the 
space in which the lattice system is embedded, that the selection of spin-projection orientations has never been mentioned. This aspect is dependent upon the geometric topology of the space. Consider ing the spin-projection orientations, the lattice gas will 
not be equivalent to the Ising model because the lattice gas itself has not any 
projecting orientation . 
[]2
  The property of differential topology and the property of geometry topology are 
two distinct properties of topology: the form er determines whether there can exist the 
continuous phase transition in a lattice system, and the la ter determines whether the 
system can become ordered. Being a continuous phase transition, the system will 
certainly become ordered, which was proved by physicists. But if the system behaves 
ordered, it may not be in the state of c ontinuous phase transition for some systems. 
This results from the difference between th e two topologies above mentioned. So it is 
necessary to discuss the infl uence of the geometric topol ogy on the magnetic order of 
the Ising model. We will discuss the probl ems in the following three respects . 
First, the geometric topology of the em bedding space for the lattice system will 
restrict the spin-projection orientations. A key point of the Onsager’s solution is his 
periodic boundary conditions. Under the condi tions, as illustrated in FIG .1, the two  
 
 
 0 xy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FIG. 1 
 2 
 
lattices in sites (- ) ,y∞  or (x,-  and (+)∞ ) ,y∞  or (x,+ )∞ have the same spin state. 
The periodic boundary conditions change th e plane square-lattice system into a 
torus-lattice system, which should be embedde d in 3-dimensional Euclidean space. If 
a lattice system can become ordered, it will be in one of  the following two states: The 
entire lattice system can be referred to as  a lattice with total spin. So, the space is 
simply connected; or there is a non-vanishing vector field, of which the appearance is 
dependent upon the geometric topology of th e lattice system.  The torus-lattice 
system is not contractible because of its geometric topological structure [. FIG .2 
shows that three simple closed curves on th e torus, and only one’s inner block of   ]3
 
 
               A
B
C
FIG.2 
 
which, the curve B inner block, can become  contractible. The singularity of the 
Onsager’s equation indicated that the sy stem certainly has the continuous phase 
transition, which implied the system is ordered but contractible. We noticed that there 
are only two spin states for the Ising m odel: spin-up and spin-down, and there are 
only three important sp in-projection orientations in va rious projecting orientations: 
the directions normal to the plane, parallel to  the x-axis and to the y-axis as illustrated 
in FIG.1. In fact, the partiti on function of the system is not affected by the projecting 
orientations because there is no the spin-pro jection orientation term in it. We found 
that the spin-projection orientation norma l to the plane with the periodic boundary 
conditions is forbidden. The reason is that if the system were ordered, the total spin-projection orientation of  the system should be normal to the torus surface, which 
cannot shrink. Then its projecting orient ation is uncertain because the normal 
orientations of the torus are different and divergent everywhere.  
However, if the spin-projection orientations are parallel to the x-axis or to the 
y-axis, the situation is completely differ ent. Let the total spin of the system be  
below its critical temperature, the average lattice spin be , and ,  be 
the total number of the lattices in the system, S
s N S s/= N
∞→N , and 0≠s , in accord with the 
thermodynamic limit condition. When the toru s-lattice system becomes ordered, there 
is a continuous non-vanishing vector field on the torus, as illustrated in FIG 3 each 
 
 
 3 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 FIG . 3 
 
 
little arrow represents an average lattice spin, which means that the topological 
property of torus allows the system to be or dered. It is the geometric topology that not 
only determines system is ordered, but also restricts the spin-projection orientations. 
Onsager’s solution means that the torus syst em’s differential topology is equivalent to 
the plane system’s differential topology, but the principle of topology tells us that their 
geometry topology are different. Notwithstanding they cannot change into each other 
automatically, (i.e., they are not one-to-one). 
In fact, the free energy of the torus-lattice system is different from the free- energy 
of the plane square-lattice system. The part ition function of the la tter is defined as 
 
∑∑∑ − + − = − =
ii iss s B B B T kH
T kH
T kHQ) 1() 2 (
) exp( ) exp( ) exp(            ( 1 )  
∑− =
j ij is s J H
,                        ,                              ( 2 )  
where H is the system Hamiltonian,  is a spin-coupling constant ,  
denotes the sum over all possibl e nearest neighbor lattices, ∑
j i,J
∑
is does the sum over 
all possible states of spins,  is the sum over all possible states of spins with the 
periodic boundary conditions, and denotes the sum over all possible states of 
spins which fail to keep the conditions. The first term on the right hand of Eq.(1) is expressed by ∑) 1 (
is
∑) 2 (
is
∑− =1
1 ) exp(
is BT kHQ                                                   ( 3 )  
Obviously,  is the partition function of the lattice system with the periodic 1Q
 4boundary conditions, namely, the partition func tion of the torus-lattice system. The 
free-energy of the plane square-lattice system and the free-energy of the torus-lattice 
system are respectively given by 
Q T k FBln−=                              ( 4 )  
1 1 lnQ T k FB−=                             ( 5 )  
Because of the exponential f unction property, we have 
 
                   ,         ,                         ( 6 )  01〉Q1Q Q〉 0〉Q
the difference between  and  is 1F F
0 ) ln(
11 〉 = − = ΔQQT k F F FB                        ( 7 )  
Under the thermodynamic limit condition FΔ changes into infinitesimal but 
non-zero, which makes the critical temperature of the torus-lattice system infinitely 
close to the critical temper ature of the plane square-l attice system so that the 
Onsager’s solution can be regarded as an exact solution of the plane square-lattice 
system. The infinitesimal difference 0〉ΔF shows that the original state cannot 
change into the state w ith the periodic boundary condi tions in the thermodynamic 
equilibrium state, and the small offset of the free-energy makes the transformation of 
the topological structure of the system so great that its fundamental group is 
completely different from the original []3. The thermodynamic limit guarantees the 
systems with and without the periodic bounda ry conditions have the same property of 
differential topology so as to have the same property of the continuous phase 
transition. This is not only seen in the plane- lattice system, but also will be seen in the 
one-dimensional lattice system []2. Furthermore, if the spin states of all lattices at the 
boundary are the same (which is one kind of the periodic boundary conditions) these 
lattices themselves will gather up to one lattice to make the plane-lattice system 
become a sphere-lattice system. The solution of  such a system will also be equivalent 
to Onsager’s solution because of its peri odic boundary conditions, and there exists 
certainly the continuous phase transition. Its geometric topology shows the sphere 
surface is simply connected , which allows the system to be ordered. However, 
there is no non-vanishing vector field on the sphere surface because of the “hairy ball 
theorem”[, which is distinct from the torus-la ttice system. When the sphere-lattice 
system becomes ordered its total spin-proje ction orientation will be along the sphere 
radial, which is arbitrary. []3
]3
 5  The second sense of the influence of the geometric properties is that the ordered 
system is not equivalent to  its appearance of continuous phase transition all the time. 
A one-dimensional Ising model can be cons tructed on each site, which coordinate 
positions are  on which is laid one lattice spin with free degree 
. Such a system can be referred as to a Ising model on the real line. Using the 
periodic boundary conditions, it is proved th at the 1-dimensional system has not the 
continuous phase transition. The periodic boundary conditi ons changed the real line 
into a circle embedded in a plane, which means that the circle-lattice system also 
cannot have the continuous phase transition li ke the real-line-lattice system because of 
the the thermodynamic limit c ondition. However, the real -line–lattice system can 
become ordered because of its simply connected,...., 2 , 2 , 1 , 1 , 0− + − + = x
1=n
[]3. In other words, the whole lattice 
system can be looked as a lattice with th e total spin, but ther e is no non-vanishing 
vector field. The circle is not simply  connected, and it allows the non-vanishing 
vector field to exist, which direction is cl ockwise or anticlockwis e. Here, we noticed 
that the 1-dimensional lattice system with or without th e periodic boundary conditions 
have the same property of differential t opology but the geometric topology makes 
them appear in different spin-projection orientations. The key point to cause the 
system to become ordered is its geomet ric topology, not its di fferential topology. 
While the free degree of spin changes from 1=n  into 〈+∞〈n1 , the chain–lattice 
system can also become ordered w ithout the continuous phase transition . We 
cannot say that all these phe nomena are physical abnormalities for all possible values 
of . As a matter of fact, they just s how a common regular pattern, namely, 
agreement with their geom etric topology and differential topology parameters []2
n
   Last, the spin-projection orientations  also depend on the dimensionality of the 
embeding space for the lattice system. If the embedded space is 2-dimensional, the 
spin-projection orientation is forbidden in  the plane’s normal direction for a plane 
lattice system or the ci rcle-lattice system. The torus must be embedded in 
3-dimensional space, and its non- vanishing vector field is al so 2-dimensional at least. 
In the 1-dimensional space the spin-projec tion orientation normal to the real line 
cannot exist. 
 
3.Conclusion 
 
  In summary, we found that the differ ential topology of the la ttice-system of the 
Ising model determines whether there can be the continuous phase transition. The geometric topology of the space the lattice-system embedded in determines whether the system can become ordered. Also if the system behaves ordered it may not have a continuous phase transition. Thus the spin -projection orientations are strongly 
influenced by the geometric topology of  the lattice-system embedding space in. 
 6References 
[]1 L. P. Kadanoff, Statistical Physics: Static s, Dynamics and Renormalizeation 
(World Scientific, Singapore,2000) p. 266 
[]2 R. K. Pathria, Statistical Mechanics (Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 2001) p. 
372-376, 319-321  
[]3 M. A. Armstrong, Basic Topology (Springer-Verlag, Ne w York, 1983) p. 173, 198, 
96 
 7