arXiv:1001.0197v1  [astro-ph.IM]  1 Jan 2010Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XIX P24
ASP Conference Series, Vol. XXX, 2009
Y. Mizumoto, K.-I. Morita, and M. Ohishi, eds.
Pointing the SOFIA Telescope
Michael A. K. Gross1, John J. Rasmussen2, Elizabeth M. Moore1
Abstract. SOFIA is anairborne, gyroscopicallystabilized 2.5minfraredtele-
scope, mounted to a spherical bearing. Unlike its predecessors, S OFIA will work
in absolute coordinates, despite its continually changing position and attitude.
In order to manage this, SOFIA must relate equatorial and telesco pe coordi-
nates using a combination of avionics data and star identiﬁcation, ma nage ﬁeld
rotation and track sky images. We describe the algorithms and syst ems required
to acquire and maintain the equatorial reference frame, relate it t o tracking im-
agers and the science instrument, set up the oscillating secondary mirror, and
aggregate pointings into relocatable nods and dithers.
1. SOFIA Telescope-Pointing Architecture
MCCSAvionicsScience
Instrument
Telescope
FFI FPIWFI
Figure 1. The telescope-pointing systems on the SOFIA aircraft.
The SOFIA pointing architecture is shown in Fig. 1. The Teles cope As-
sembly (TA) keeps track of its attitude using gyroscopes cor rected by tracking
imagers, but is unaware of sky coordinates. The Science Inst rument (SI) is
responsible for science data acquisition. Avionics provid e aircraft location and
attitude necessary to initialize sky coordinates. The Miss ion Communications &
Control System (MCCS) correlates gyroscopes with sky coord inates and trans-
lates pointing building blocks between coordinate systems .
2. Coordinate Systems
The TA describes its attitude as a 3 degree-of-freedom (DOF) rotation from the
telescope reference frame (TARF) to various coordinate sys tems mechanically
attached to the telescope. The MCCS translates these to exte rnal coordinates,
and accounts for the optical path. The TA is far from rigid and orthogonal;
thus many intermediate coordinate systems are established . Directly-observable
1Universities Space Research Assoc., NASA/Ames Research Ce nter, Moﬀett Field, CA, USA
2Critical Realm Corp., San Jose, CA, USA
12 Gross, Rasmussen, and Moore
MCCS coordinate systems are Equatorial (ERF) and grid coord inates for the
three tracking imagers and the Science Instrument (SIRF). K ey internal coor-
dinate systems are the telescope and inertial references (T ARF and IRF) with
IRF derived from a set of gyroscopes. The MCCS distributes po sitions in all
coordinates for real-time monitoring, FITS headers, and ar chiving.
3. Establishing Equatorial Coordinates
The MCCS uses a 2-3 stage approach to relate ERF to IRF, to∼<1′′:
1. Rough-estimate ( ∼1◦) ERF coordinates from avionics-reported aircraft
position and attitude and the TA’s IRF and airframe attitude s.
2. Fine-tune using ﬁeld recognition (PIXY; Yoshida 2000) on the Wide Field
Imager (WFI; 6◦FOV).
3. Optionally, reﬁne further using a 2DOF correction, based upon two Focal
Plane Imager (FPI; 0.57′′pixels) acquisitions several degrees apart.
TheoperatormonitorsIRF /mapsto→ERFwithanoverlay ofcalculated positionsofstars
on imagers against sky images (see Fig. 2), and executes the 2 DOF reﬁnement
when mismatch drifts too large.
4. Simple Pointing and Tracking
The TA can be pointed in any directly observable coordinate s ystem. Areas
of Interest (AOIs) can be deﬁned on imagers; the TA continual ly calculates
AOI centroids. This provides stability feedback to the TA, n ecessary because
gyroscopes are not suﬃcient to maintain pointing over hours . A centroiding
AOI can be attached to a position of interest; when activated , the TA keeps
the image ﬁxed at the desired position, by modifying IRF to ca ncel its motions
inferred from the AOI. The AOI need not coincide with the poin t of interest.
5. Chopping
A chop is a high-frequency square-wave oscillation of the se condary mirror
(SMA),synchronizedelectronically withimageracquisiti on tosubtractskyback-
ground. Only the FPI and SI observe chopped images; other ima gers do not
share the optical path with the telescope. A given FPI or SI pi xel has two ERF
coordinates since any images taken are a superpositionof tw o images with diﬀer-
ent centers; theMCCSpublishesbothforkeypositions. For p ointingcommands,
positions can be modiﬁed by chop beam designation. The SMA is commanded
by a 2D center oﬀset, amplitude, and position angle, and a coor dinate system.
SMA state is propagated through telescope motions by keepin g its speciﬁcation
constant in the coordinate system speciﬁed. A “3-point” cho p is also supported;
this includes a pause at an intermediate point (labelled “0” ).
6. Nodding and Dithering
A nod is a low-frequency motion of the whole telescope, usual ly relating to an
accompanying chop, to remove instrument backgrounds. Nods are deﬁned inPointing the SOFIA Telescope 3
Figure 2. Typical telescope setup for a single data acquisition. Two A OIs
are deﬁned on the WFI (left) to monitor rotation. A third is deﬁned o n the
FPI (right) to monitor transverse drift. Computed positions are s uperposed
(for both chopped beams on the FPI), along with their names. Misma tch
represents several arcseconds of drift in absolute pointing; dep ending on the
precision required, a realignment may be necessary. Data shown is s ky simu-
lation (Br¨ uggenwirth, Gross, Nelbach, & Shuping 2009) with a ther mal dark
current model. The FPI is at 20◦C and the WFI is at −40◦C.
φ
XY
Nod A
Nod B(Nod X)b1
b2A(ref)
E
DCB
Figure 3. Graphical description of nodding (left) and dithering (righ t).
Nods are speciﬁed in the same manner as chops, so they can be matc hed
unconditionally, without direct connections. The center position (“ Nod X”)
is optional, and can be used to match a 3-point chop, which includes th e
center position as well. A formulation based upon circular lists of relat ive
pointings is used for dithers – all positions are understood to be rela tive to
the ﬁrst.
the same manner as chops, without direct coupling, and are pr opagated through
telescope motions identically. Dithers are a generalizati on of nods to arbitrary-
length sequences, intended to image the same star on several diﬀerent imager
pixels, in order to remove outliers such as cosmic ray hits or hot pixels. The ﬁrst
position in a dither is considered to be a “reference,” with a ll other positions
deﬁnedrelative to it, for relocatability on thesky. Chops, nods, and dithers have
no direct coupling and can therefore be mixed and matched in a ny combination.4 Gross, Rasmussen, and Moore
7. Managing Field Rotation
TA motion is signiﬁcantly constrained by clearance to the ai rframe. Thus, az-
imuth is mostly controlled by turning the aircraft (Gross & S huping 2009).
Rotation against the sky can be held constant as the aircraft rotates up to 5 .6◦.
As this rotation nears its limit, the telescope is periodica lly “rewound” manually
to a new rotation angle, between data acquisitions. During r ewind, all building
blocks are held constant in the coordinate systems in which t hey were deﬁned.
8. Key Design Points and Tests
In order to minimize development risk for the MCCS, several c ritical design
features have been included. Pointing building blocks do no t depend directly
on each other and state derives strictly from the TA, allowin g for independent
development, testing, and operational use. Much attention has been given to
abstraction andsimpliﬁcation, toaidindevelopment of tes tingprocedures. Each
building block has a realistic operational “scenario,” deﬁ ning detailed inputs,
operator commands, user-visible outputs, and intermediat e calculations.
Coordinate systems present special problems, and are notor iously diﬃcult
to orient correctly and keep that way; to that end, regressio n tests include:
•Diurnal rotation rate measurements with zero aircraft spee d.
•A “home position” at the equator on the vernal equinox, with n orthbound
heading and zero speed (enables manual calculations).
•Modifying each coordinate parameter individually.
•Composite tests (veriﬁes calculations are in the correct or der).
•Corner cases (identiﬁes quadrant problems).
•Complete-system tests pointing to speciﬁc stars, using syn thetic images.
Some tests violate TA physical limits; these are evaluated a gainst a simulator
(Br¨ uggenwirth, Gross, Nelbach, & Shuping 2009)
9. Conclusion
Placing a telescope on a moving platform, whilestill desiri ngto point in absolute
coordinates, presents a diﬃcult challenge for software dev elopment. Eventual
success of the SOFIA platform in this regard depends upon car eful abstraction
and testing strategies for pointing the telescope.
References
Br¨ uggenwirth, S., Gross, M. A. K., Nelbach, F. J., & Shuping, R. Y. 2 009, in ASP
Conf. Ser. XXX, ADASS XVIII, ed. D.A. Bohlender, D. Durand & P. D owler
(San Francisco: ASP), 485
Gross, M. A. K. & Shuping, R. Y. 2009, in ASP Conf. Ser. XXX, ADASS XVIII, ed.
D.A. Bohlender, D. Durand & P. Dowler (San Francisco: ASP), 314
Yoshida, S. 2000, PIXY System, http://www.aerith.net/misao/pixy 1/index.html