IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROP AGA TION LETTERS, VOL. 8, 2009 1341
On the Bandwidth of High-Impedance Frequency
Selective Surfaces
Filippo Costa , Student Member , IEEE , Simone Genovesi , Member , IEEE , and
Agostino Monorchio , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract— In this letter , the bandwidth of high-impedance sur-
faces (HISs) is discussed by an equivalent circuit approach. Even ifthese surfaces have been employed for almost 10 years, it is some-times unclear how to choose the shape of the frequency selective
surface (FSS) on the top of the grounded slab in order to achieve
the largest possible bandwidth. Here, we will show that the con-ventional approach describing the HIS as a parallel connection be-tween the inductance given by the grounded dielectric substrateand the capacitance of the FSS may induce inaccurate results inthe determination of the operating bandwidth of the structure. In-deed, in order to derive a more complete model and to provide amore accurate estimate of the operating bandwidth, it is also neces-sary to introduce the series inductance of the FSS. We will presentthe explicit expression for deﬁning the bandwidth of a HIS, and wewill show that the reduction of the FSS inductance results in thebest choice for achieving wide operating bandwidth in correspon-dence with a given frequency.
Index T erms— Artiﬁcial magnetic conductor (AMC), bandwidth
of high-impedance surfaces (HISs).
I. I NTRODUCTION
HIGH-IMPEDANCE surfaces (HISs) [1] have been fre-
quently employed in electromagnetic devices, as for
instance in the design of low-proﬁle antennas [2], [3] or im-proved electromagnetic absorbers [4], [5]. As is well known,
these structures mimic the perfect magnetic conductor (PMC)
condition within a small frequency range, and for this reason,they are often referred to as artiﬁcial magnetic conductors(AMCs). It is therefore evident that the bandwidth of this meta-
surface is one of the key features of the structure. Some papers
available in literature often present novel artiﬁcial surfacesclaiming a large operational bandwidth. However, in order tomake a fair comparison, structures with equal substrate should
be considered since the substrate parameters are essential in
deﬁning the HIS bandwidth. In this work, we show that theconventional representation of the HIS as a parallel circuit
between the inductance of the grounded dielectric and the
capacitance given by the capacitive frequency selective surface(FSS) is not fully accurate for the determination of the devicebandwidth. In particular, we demonstrate that it is necessary
to include the series inductance of the FSS in the equivalent
circuit for obtaining the correct expression of the bandwidth.
Manuscript received November 09, 2009; revised November 20, 2009. First
published December 11, 2009; current version published December 29, 2009.
The authors are with the Department of Information Engineering, Univer-
sity of Pisa, 56122 Pisa, Italy (e-mail: ﬁlippo.costa@iet.unipi.it; simone.gen-
ovesi@iet.unipi.it; a.monorchio@iet.unipi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this letter are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LA WP.2009.2038346Afterward, the inﬂuence of the cell shape on the HIS bandwidth
is analyzed. Simple considerations on the equivalent circuit
allow us to deﬁne the shape of the periodic cell ensuringthe widest frequency band. In particular, we are interestedin deriving the most wideband FSS shape in correspondence
with a ﬁxed frequency since this issue has many interesting
practical implications. Some examples of AMC structures,whose substrate thickness and permittivity are kept constant,are presented and discussed.
II. F
ORMULA TION
The equivalent input impedance of the reactive surface
can be interpreted as the parallel connection of the FSS
impedance
 and the equivalent input impedance of
the grounded dielectric slab,
 . For normal incidence, the
impedance of the (thin) grounded dielectric slab behaves asan inductor (
,
 and
 being the permeability and
thickness, respectively, of the dielectric slab). The FSS element
can be modeled as a single capacitance in the quasi-static
region or by a RLC series circuit for a larger frequency range.
Considering the FSS element as a pure capacitive element
, the bandwidth
 of the HIS structure, deﬁned as the
range where the phase of reﬂection coefﬁcient is comprised
between
 and
 , can be written as the bandwidth of
a parallel LC circuit
(1)
where
 represents the inductance of the substrate,
 is the an-
gular resonance frequency, and
 is the free-space impedance.
From the relation (1), it results that an increase of the substrate
thickness enlarges the bandwidth of the structure due to the
growth of the inductance. We also mention that the use of amagnetic substrate would be a valuable strategy for obtaininga higher inductance value and, as a consequence, a bandwidth
increment [6].
However, from (1), one might conclude that, while keeping
the substrate thickness and the resonance frequency constant,a highly capacitive element such as a patch with a very small
gap would be characterized by a smaller bandwidth than a less
coupled element as a cross. Moreover, if we model the FSS byusing a capacitor only, we could speculate that different shapes
of the patch, with different gaps and different periodicities but
with the same value of averaged capacitance [7], would have thesame bandwidth. Contrarily, these considerations are incorrectbecause the simple LC parallel circuit, even if it is an excellent
tool for studying these structures [5], [7], does not allow to cor-
rectly predict the operating bandwidth.
1536-1225/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE1342 IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROP AGA TION LETTERS, VOL. 8, 2009
Fig. 1. Equivalent transmission line of a (a) high-impedance surface and (b) its
corresponding lumped circuit model allowing to correctly determine the band-
width of the structure.
Fig. 2. Qualitative behavior of the reactive impedance in (2) and graphical rep-resentation of the HIS bandwidth.
In order to properly evaluate the bandwidth of the HIS struc-
tures, it is necessary to consider a more complete circuit wherethe series inductance
of the FSS has been introduced (as
shown in Fig. 1).
The impedance of the circuit reported in Fig. 1(b) reads
(2)
As is well known, the high-impedance condition is veriﬁed
when the denominator of (2) is null, namely at the angular res-onance frequency
. The bandwidth of a
high-impedance surface is deﬁned as the frequency range where
the absolute value of the impedance is larger than the free-space
impedance (see Fig. 2).
This condition corresponds to a phase of reﬂection coefﬁcient
comprised within the range [
 ,
 ] [1]. In order to deﬁne
the bandwidth of the new equivalent circuit, it is necessary to
ﬁnd the two positive frequencies for which the impedance in (2)is equal to
and
 (see Fig. 2). In the former case, the
equation has two positive solutions for
 , and we must select
the ﬁrst one; indeed, the second one would be obtained when the
HIS impedance is equal to
 at higher frequency, well after the
AMC band (see Fig. 2). In the latter case, the equation has onlya positive solution for
. The two equations can be solved by
employing the theory of the cubic equations [8]. By dividing the
Fig. 3. Fractional bandwidth of a high-impedance surface as a function of the
FSS series inductance /76(by ﬁxing the grounded substrate inductance /76
 to 7
nH) and as a function of /76
 (by ﬁxing /76to 4 nH) . The capacitance is varied
in order to preserve the same resonance frequency that is ﬁxed to 6 GHz in all
cases.
equations by the coefﬁcient of
 , we can write the coefﬁcients
in the other three terms as follows:
(3)
By deﬁning the three following intermediate coefﬁcients:
(4)
we can get the two right solutions and, after some algebra, we
can also derive the ﬁnal expression of the fractional bandwidthof the new circuit (
)a s
(5)
In order to highlight how the FSS series inductance inﬂuences
the fractional bandwidth of the high-impedance surface, the re-lation (5) is plotted in Fig. 3 as a function of
and
 . When
the values of the inductances are varied, the capacitance value
is changed as well in order to maintain the resonance frequencyﬁxed. In this case, the resonance frequency of the resonator ischosen to be equal to 6 GHz. The values for the inductances and
the capacitance are realistic values in a practical design. As ex-
pected, increasing the grounded substrate inductance leads to anenlargement of the fractional bandwidth. Conversely, it is worthunderlining that an increase of the series inductance implies a
reduction of the fractional bandwidth.COST A et al. : ON THE BANDWIDTH OF HIGH-IMPEDANCE FREQUENCY SELECTIVE SURFACES 1343
Fig. 4. FSS element shapes under investigation.
The fractional bandwidth of this resonant circuit can be max-
imized both by decreasing the inductance and the capacitance
of the FSS (considering that the inductance of the substrate isﬁxed). Anyway, in order to preserve the same resonance fre-quency, an increase of the capacitance value must correspond
to a decrease of the series inductance and vice versa. As it is
apparent from Fig. 3, the minimization of the inductance of theelement and the consequent increase of the capacitance resultsin the best choice for maximizing the fractional bandwidth. The
inductance of an FSS can be lowered by using large elements
with respect to the unit cell (as, for instance, the solid interiorelements deﬁned in [4]). This argument can be intuitively ex-plained by considering the inductance of a straight wire above
the ground plane. According to the expression reported in [9], it
follows that the inductance of a printed structure can be loweredby using large element for a constant value of substrate thick-ness. For these reasons, we expect that a cross element will be
the most narrowband, whereas the patch-type element will be
the most wideband even if its capacitance is higher.
III. N
UMERICAL RESUL TS
To demonstrate these intuitive considerations, we analyze six
different FSS shapes on the same grounded dielectric substrate(Fig. 4). The substrate parameters are
and
thickness equal to 1.6 mm (typical of the commercial FR4).
Patch elements characterized by a different ratio
 between the
patch size
 and the periodicity
 are analyzed
together with a cross-shaped FSS, an interdigitated patch, anda meandered shape [10], [11]. Another candidate offering large
operational bandwidths is the hexagon element, but it does not
guarantee better performance in terms of bandwidth with re-spect to the square patch.
To obtain a resonance in correspondence with the same fre-
quency, the different elements must have different periodicities.Fig. 5 shows the phase of reﬂection coefﬁcient of different HISconﬁgurations with the same substrate and a periodicity de-
signed so that all the analyzed structures resonate at the same
frequency. To conﬁrm the validity of our model [and thereforethe bandwidth relation presented in (5)], the impedances of theFSSs under analysis were determined by the inversion method
proposed in [12]. Once computed, each FSS impedance, the
values of the capacitance, and the inductance can be obtained byan iterative procedure. The impedances for each FSS elementemployed in the HIS conﬁgurations are reported in Fig. 6 to-
gether with its approximation by the series LC circuit. In Table I,
a summary of the capacitances and inductances for each ana-lyzed shape is reported together with the fractional bandwidthcomputed in accordance to the relation (5). From these values,
it is apparent that an increase of the FSS capacitance does not
Fig. 5. Phase of reﬂection coefﬁcient of different HIS on the same substrate
and a periodicity ( /68) designed so that all the analyzed structures resonate at the
same frequency.
Fig. 6. Reactive impedance of the FSS of the different cell shapes.
T ABLE I
INDUCT ANCE AND CAP ACIT ANCE VALUES OF THE FSS SUNDER ANAL YSIS
AND THE PERCENT AGE FRACTIONAL BANDWIDTH /70/66/87
 ,C OMPUTED BY
THE RELA TION (5)
correspond to a decrease of the bandwidth as one could infer by
observing the relation (1). This happens because, as for instance1344 IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROP AGA TION LETTERS, VOL. 8, 2009
in the patch shape, the reduction of the distance between adja-
cent patches implies an increase of the capacitance but, at thesame time, a strong reduction of the inductance.
Nevertheless, the simpliﬁed relation (1) correctly predicts the
enlargement of the fractional bandwidth in the patch-type FSSwhen the distance between adjacent patches is increased andthe periodicity is kept constant [13] (however, this case is not of
practical interest since we do not obtain the resonance in cor-
respondence with the same frequency). We also conclude thatthe bandwidth of the cross element is the smallest, whereas,among the patches, a higher ratio
leads to a larger bandwidth
of the FSS. The meandered structure is characterized both by
a high capacitance, due to the strong coupling between adja-cent lines, and a high inductance, due to the narrowness and thelength of the lines. Indeed, these high values are instrumental
for a substantial miniaturization of the cell in an AMC conﬁgu-
ration. This small periodicity determines a total capacitance anda total inductance (depending on the periodicity also [7]) similarto other elements (see Table I).
Similar results for the bandwidth of crosses and patches were
qualitatively explained in [14] by exploiting the theory of smallantennas. The authors argued that the AMC bandwidth is re-duced by the degree to which the ﬁelds are localized within the
surface texture and do not uniformly ﬁll its volume. Finally, it is
worth mentioning that the patch-type FSS with very small gapis the more effective solution for blocking the TE surface waves.Indeed, the effectiveness of the FSS in blocking the normal mag-
netic ﬁeld determines the TE mode cutoff frequency, and hence
the TE bandwidth [15].
IV . C
ONCLUSION
In this letter, a novel circuit approach for studying the band-
width of HISs has been presented. As discussed in the bodyof this letter, the conventional representation of the HIS as a
parallel LC circuit leads to an inaccurate estimate of the de-
vice bandwidth. For such a reason, the expression of the frac-tional bandwidth by using a more complete equivalent circuit,including also the series FSS inductance, has been derived. We
have shown that the increase of the series inductance implies
a reduction of the fractional bandwidth. It has therefore beendemonstrated that the patch FSS element with a small gap be-tween adjacent patches, even if strongly capacitive, is the bestchoice for designing a wideband AMC in correspondence with
a ﬁxed frequency. We have also shown that an extremely minia-turized HIS can be designed by employing a meandered shape
element while maintaining wideband properties.
R
EFERENCES
[1] D. Sievenpiper, L. Zhang, R. F. J. Broas, N. G. Alexopolous, and E.
Y ablonovitch, “High-impedance electromagnetic surfaces with a for-
bidden frequency band,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 47,
no. 11, pp. 2059–2074, Nov. 1999.
[2] R. F. J. Broas, D. F. Sievenpiper, and E. Y ablonovitch, “A
high-impedance ground plane applied to a cellphone handset ge-
ometry,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. , vol. 49, no. 7, pp.
1262–1265, Jul. 2001.
[3] F. Costa, A. Monorchio, S. Talarico, and F. M. V aleri, “An active high
impedance surface for low proﬁle tunable and steerable antennas,”
IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. , vol. 7, pp. 676–680, 2008.
[4] B. A. Munk , Frequency Selective Surfaces – Theory and Design .N e w
Y ork: Wiley, 2000.
[5] O. Luukkonen, F. Costa, A. Monorchio, C. R. Simovski, and S. A.
Tretyakov, “A thin electromagnetic absorbers for wide incidence an-
gles and both polarizations,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 57,
no. 10, pp. 3119–3125, Oct. 2009.
[6] R. Diaz, V. Sanchez, E. Caswell, and A. Miller, “Magnetic loading of
artiﬁcial magnetic conductors for bandwidth enhancement,” in Proc.
IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp. , Columbus, OH, Jun. 2003,
vol. 2, pp. 431–434.
[7] S. Tretyakov , Analytical Modelling in Applied Electromag-
netics . Boston, MA: Artech House, 2003.
[8] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun , Handbook of Mathematical Func-
tions . New Y ork: Dover, 1965, 1972.
[9] C. L. Holloway and E. F. Kuester, “Net and partial inductance of a
microstrip ground plane,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. , vol. 40,
no. 1, pp. 33–46, Feb. 1998.
[10] S. Barbagallo, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, “Small periodicity FSS
screens with enhanced bandwidth performance,” Electron. Lett. , vol.
42, no. 7, p. 7:8, Mar. 2006.
[11] A. Monorchio, S. Genovesi, E. Carrubba, and G. Manara, “Design of
printed FSS for compact and bandwidth-enhanced metasurfaces,” in
Proc. 1st Int. Congress Adv. Electromagn. Mater. Microw. Opt. , Rome,
Italy, Oct. 22–24, 2007, pp. 811–814.
[12] F. Costa, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, “An equivalent-circuit mod-
eling of high impedance surfaces employing arbitrarily shaped FSS,”
inProc. ICEEA , Turin, Italy, Sep. 14–18, 2009, pp. 852–855.
[13] F. Y ang and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Reﬂection phase characterizations of
the EBG ground plane for low proﬁle wire antenna applications,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2691–2703, Oct. 2003.
[14] D. F. Sievenpiper, J. H. Schaffner, H. J. Song, R. Y. Loo, and G. Tang-
onan, “Two-dimensional beam steering using an electrically tunable
impedance surface,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 51, no. 10,
pp. 2713–2722, Oct. 2003.
[15] S. Clavijo, R. E. Dýaz, and W. E. McKinzie, III, “Design methodology
for sievenpiper high-impedance surfaces: An artiﬁcial magnetic con-
ductor for positive gain electrically small antennas,” IEEE Trans. An-
tennas Propag. , vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2678–2690, Oct. 2003.