Response to I. I. Mazin’s correspondence on “Electronic correlations in the iron 
pnictides”  
 M. M. Qazilbash
1, J. J. Hamlin1,2, R. E. Baumbach1,2, Lijun Zhang3, D. J. Singh3,  
M. B. Maple1,2 and D. N. Basov1. 
 
1. Department of Physics, University of Californi a, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA  
2. Institute for Pure and Applied Physical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92093, USA  
3. Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,  
Tenne ssee 37831, USA  
 
 
There is accumulating evidence for substantial renormalization of the iron d- bands on a 
several tenth of eV scale in the iron pnictides, starting with photoemission experiments on LaFePO [1]. Recent direct measurements of the Fermi surface of LaFePO using 
quantum oscillations support this, finding mass renormalizations of ~2 depending on the 
particular Fermi surface sheet compared with band structure calculati ons [2]. We 
compared optical spectra and electronic structure calculations and di scovered a 
renormalization  of the Drude weight in LaFePO consistent with the mass renormalization 
found in the above experiments [3]. Specifically, we showed that the experimental Drude weight (K
exp) is substantially suppressed relative to  the bare band st ructure value ( Kband) 
and we attributed this phenomenon to correlation effects of electronic origin [3].  
 
Recently, Mazin has criticized our  conclusion arguing that band shifts of +100 meV for 
the electron bands and -100 meV for the hole bands would reduce  the needed mass 
renormalization by ~2/3, leaving only  the remaining  ~1/3 to be explained by electronic 
correlations [4].  In this response, we point out that the effect discussed by Mazin is 
considerably smaller than he claims and, in particular, is too small to change our 
conclusions. In addition, the minor  band shifts may well be a consequence of the 
electronic correlations that we find.  
 
Mazin bases his criticism on the measurements by Coldea and co -workers [2]. Actually, 
Coldea and co -workers note that shifts will improve the agreement between the density 
functional bands and their quantum oscillation measurements, but the shifts  are 
substantially  smaller  than those assumed by Mazin, and even then some of the shifts may be related to sample stoichiometry . None of these  shifts  on any Fermi surface is  as large 
as 100 meV  quoted by Mazin. A noteworthy  effect is the removal of  the heavy 3D hole  
sheet. However, because of its heavy mass, this sheet contributes very little to the Drude 
weight  that we register in our experiments . The main contribution (~65%) to the Drude 
weight  according to our calculations  in fact comes from the electron sections.  This 
dominance of the electron sheets is im portant because the overall effect  of band shifts on 
the electron contrib ution are smaller than the effect of similar shifts on the hole 
contribution. There are two electron  sections, an  inner section and an outer se ction, which 
according to Coldea and co -workers  can be brought into optimum agreement with  their 
experiment using shifts of 83 and 30 meV accompanied by a mass  renormalization . The 
optimum shift of the hole bands of  -53 meV  is also much smaller  in magnitude than  -100 
meV  invoked by Mazin. The actual change in the electron Fermi surface volume is small  
(~15%), as may be seen from Fig s. 3c and 3d of Ref. 2.  This contradicts the claim of 
Mazin, who asserts that the main contribution to the discrepancy in the optical Drude 
spectral weight (proportional to n/ mopt) is due to a change in the effective Fermi surface 
volume ( n) and not the effective optical mass ( mopt).  
 
Finally, we note that although Mazin invokes the well known density functional band gap 
error in simple insulators  such as Ge as the mechanism for band shifts , there is no reason 
to suppose that the same physi cs is operative in a partially filled metallic d-band system. 
For example, t here are strong shifts  in electronic structure relative to density functional 
calculations  in correlated oxides such as NiO, and these are primarily associated with 
electron correl ations (Mott physics in that case ).  
 To summarize, Mazin’s arguments do not invalidate our conclusions because  (1) the 
band shifts seen in experiment are significantly smaller than what he proposed, leaving a substantial renormalization of the Drude weig ht to be explained by correlations of 
electronic origin , (2) the observed band shifts may also reflect electronic correlations  
themselves  and (3) many experiments are converging on the fact that there are substantial 
band renormalizations  on the tenths of eV scale consistent with our report . These include 
optical measurements on EuFe
2As2 as compared with density functional calculations by Moon, Mazin and co- workers [5]. Moreover, our conclusion about the importance of 
electronic correlations in the iron pni ctides was also based on the significant 
renormalization of the Drude weight ( Kexp/Kband ~ 0.3)  in paramagnetic BaFe 2As2 [3]. A 
more recent infrared work on LaFeAsO also reported a factor -of-3 renormalization of the 
Drude weight [6]. As for the detailed nature of the electronic correlation effects, this 
remains an open question [3] . 
 
 
[1] D. H. Lu et al. , Nature 455, 81 (2008).  
[2] A. I. Coldea et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 216402 (2008). 
[3] M. M. Qazilbash et al. , Nature Physics 5, 647 (2009) . 
[4] I. I. Mazin, arXiv:0910.4117 (2009).  
[5] S. J. Moon et al. , arXiv:0909.3352 (2009).  
[6] Z. G. Chen et al. , arXiv:0910.1318 (2009) . 