arXiv:1001.0105v4  [cond-mat.str-el]  5 Mar 2010Itinerancy-localization duality of quasiparticles revea led by strong
correlation
Byung Gyu Chae
Basic Research Laboratory, ETRI, Daejeon 305-350, South Kore a
Abstract
The strong interaction between electrons reveals the duali ty of the itinerancy
and the localization of quasiparticles. The physical pheno mena corresponding
to each component of the duality could be realized and coexis t within the
category of the uncertainty principle of the carrier dynami cs, which can be a
strong reason for the complexity appearing in the strongly c orrelated system.
A possiblemechanism for thehigh-temperaturesuperconduc tivity is proposed
on the basis of the interplay between the renormalized expec tation quantities
of both parts.
Typeset using REVT EX
1The dynamics of interacting electrons in solids is expected to be very diﬀerent from that
of free electrons, and nevertheless, the quasiparticle concept f rom the Fermi liquid theory
has been used as a successful tool in describing the elementary ex citation of the interacting
system.1,2However, in the strong correlation regime, there appears to be an omalous prop-
erties away from the Fermi liquid behaviors,3,4so that it remains to be a question whether
this description can be valid for explaining the interaction to some ext ent. Up to now,
many approaches5–7within this scheme have been carried out in order to analyze the stro ng
correlation eﬀects on the electrodynamics of the carriers.
In general, the interaction between electrons impedes their motion . Quasiparticles in
the interacting system evolve through a non-stationary eigensta te, which indicates a weakly
localized state with a damping rate. Correlated metal sometimes exh ibits localized property
together with itinerant behavior, and at the ultimate interaction, it becomes an insulator
with fully localized carriers, known as the Mott insulator. Spectral r epresentation of the
propagatorfor interacting systems shows a duality of the quasipa rticle stateandthe incoher-
ent background fully localized in space.8,9In the strongly correlated regime, the incoherent
background, aswell astheweaklocalizationofthequasiparticlesta te, canbemeaningfuland
can play a role in physical phenomenon. We note that a strong corre lation reveals a duality
of the localization and itinerancy of the charge carrier dynamics, an d it is believed that the
correlated system can be explained by considering the duality compo nent simultaneously.
Let us investigate the carrier dynamics by using the propagator, w hich is represented
as the Green function. The single-particle Green function has a gen eral form,G(xt,x′t′) =
−i/angbracketleftΨo|T[ˆψ(xt)ˆψ†(x′t′)]|Ψo/angbracketright, where the ˆψ(xt) andˆψ†(x′t′) are the ﬁeld operators that create
(annihilate) the electron. By taking the Fourier transform, the Gr een function is expressed
in energy-momentum representation.
G(k,ω) =/summationdisplay
m|/angbracketleftΨo|ˆψ|Ψm/angbracketright|2
ω−ǫk±iη(1)
The spectral density function is obtained from the identity, A(k,ω) =−(1/π)ImG(k,ω),
resulting in/summationtext
m|/angbracketleftΨo|ˆψ|Ψm/angbracketright|2δ(ω−ǫk). In a non-interacting system, the Green function has
2one pole with free particle energy ǫk, where the spectral density is delta-function. But, the
interacting system has spectral function that spreads out from the superposition of many
poles. The representation of the Green function in time-domain is fa vorable for investigating
the itinerancy of the quasiparticle, G(k,t) =/integraltextG(k,ω)e−iωtdω. By the contour integral, the
function can be split into a coherent quasiparticle state and an incoh erent background with
no pole.2
G(k,t) =−iZke−iεkt−Γkt+Ginch (2)
The ﬁrst part of the equation shows that the state propagates lik e a wave packet with
an energyεkand damping rate Γ k. The amplitude of the wave packet is the residue of the
function, known as the renormalization constant Zk. Figure 1(a) depicts the dynamics of
the quasiparticle in the lattice model that has the strong interactio n. In general, the overlap
of the atomic orbitals in lattices removes the degeneracy of each or bital to form a band,
which makes it possible for the electron to freely migrate within the ba nd. As shown in Fig.
1(a), in the case of a weak overlap of the orbital, the electron is no lo nger a free particle and
rather, feels the potential barrier to move around, where the ca rrier state is the wave packet
that is slightly localized in space.
The Green function in the interacting system can be expressed in te rms of the self-energy
Σ(k,ω), as likeG(k,ω) = 1/(ω−εk−Σ(k,ω)).10From this notation, the renormalization
constant and the elementary excitation energy are expressed as Zk= (1−∂ReΣ)−1and
εk=Zk(ǫk+ReΣ), respectively. In Fig. 1(b), the spectral function shows a Lorentzian form
with a height Zkand width Γ k, where the latter is proportional to [( πkBT)2+(εk−ǫF)2].
The Fermi liquid description is valid when it is close to the Fermi surface . On the other
hand, when the renormalization constant approaches zero, the q uasiparticle is considered
to be fully localized in the lattice site. In Eq. (2), only the incoherent p art of the Green
function remains at the zero value of the renormalization constant . It is ensured that Ginch
is associated with the localization of the quasiparticle in the lattice site .
The strong many-body interaction increases the self-energy and causes the elementary
3excitation energy to not be a negligible value. The quasiparticle may no t be a good, eﬀective
single-particle state, and in addition, the incoherent part of the Gr een function has a value
that cannot be ignored. In this situation, the interacting particle c an behave in two ways;
one is a mobile quasiparticle state and the other is an incoherent back ground localized in
the lattice site. In the limit t →0, the Green function presents a momentum distribution
in Fig. 1(c), where Zbecomes the discontinuity at the Fermi surface.11We consider that
the incoherent part of the Green function is closely related to the p article-hole excitation,
from the curve of the momentum distribution. This is depicted in a dot ted line in Fig. 1(b),
which can be a strong clue of the collective excitation in the correlate d system. This is a
diﬀerent concept from the collective modes derived by the instability of the nesting vector
of the mobile carriers or in the Luttinger liquid in one dimension.
According to the sum rules, the spectral density function is repre sented as the quasi-
particle part,/integraltextAch(k,ω)dω=Zand the incoherent background,/integraltextAinch(k,ω)dω= 1−Z.
The valueZbecomes a measure to evaluate the itinerancy of the quasiparticle. We simply
extract that the coherent part of the Green function is weighted by the itinerancy factor
Z, and the incoherent part by the factor 1 −Z, becauseA(k,ω) is only the probability of
adding and removing particle to the many-body system. Namely, the Green function has
the form,G=ZG′
ch+(1−Z)G′
inch.
The interacting system is described by the basic Hamiltonian with a kine tic energy
and Coulomb energy. We infer that the Hamiltonian can be clearly divide d into coherent
and incoherent parts because both parts have independent eigen sates in time. Considering
that the physical observable is represented as the expectation q uantity, it is convenient
to assume that the operators of both parts are themselves weigh ted by factors√
Zand
√1−Z, respectively, which imply the weight factor, as like c†
k=√
Zc′†
k. In the coherent
part described by operators, c†andck, the state propagates with a quasiparticle eigenvalue
εkand weighting factor Z. Eﬀective Hamiltonians Hchof coherent part is expressed as
follows,
4Hch=/summationdisplay
kεkc†
kck+/summationdisplay
k,k′,qVqc†
k+qc†
k′−qck′ck (3)
whereεkandVqare the dressed kinetic energy and interaction between quasipart icles.
In a similar way, the operators of incoherent part can describe the collective excitation with
a weighting factor 1 −Z. Eﬀective Hamiltonian Hinchcorresponds to the Hubbard model
except for the electron localization,12,13where the electron can not move to the nearest site
due to the on-site interaction Ularger than the hopping energy t. The hopping energy plays
a role only in the spread of the excitation bands, so that this may well describe the collective
excitation of incoherent bands, in Fig. 1(b).
From the above propagator formalism, we ﬁnd that the many-body correlation reveals
a duality in the itinerancy and localization of the quasiparticle in the str ongly correlated
system. This is based on the wave-particle duality in the basic concep t of quantum mechan-
ics. However, there is a crucial point here, namely the duality arises from not an external
measuring operation but a strong correlation in the system. It is ve ry interesting to know
whether the physical phenomenon corresponding to each compon ent of the duality could be
simultaneously realized and coexist in the system, and further, inte rplays with each other
to make a new phenomenon.
Considering the splitting of the coherent and incoherent states, t he instability exists in
knowing which component is dominantly revealed in the system, espec ially when two com-
ponents have comparable values. This closely resembles the observ ing process in quantum
phenomenon, that is, the physical quantity in possible states can b e uncovered only after
an external observing process. Here, we can guess the spatial e xtent of the quasiparticle
state from the uncertainty principle, ∆ x∆p≥¯h
2. The coherent part of the propagator is ob-
tained from the summation of the possible excited states of an addin g particle and thus, the
particle-like peak spreads out in the momentum space. Namely, the p lane wave transforms
into a wave packet slightly localized in space, and then evolves over a lif etime. Assuming
that the lifetime of the quasiparticle is about several decades meV, the ability to conﬁrm
the location of the quasiparticle state extends over several deca des˚A. On the other hand, as
5mentioned previously, the incoherent background can make the co llective excitation. There-
fore, electronic inhomogenity will appear in the strongly correlated system.
Our approachis applicable to theunderstanding of the high-temper ature superconductor
known as the representative of the strongly correlated system. The parent material of
this system is the Mott insulator with antiferromagnetic ordering, a nd by deviating from
the half-ﬁlling, collective excitations appear.4Elementary excitation is generally analyzed
by using the Hubbard model in the mean-ﬁeld basis.14However, this analysis does not
consider the renormalization factor. Our study describes the sup erconductor and density
wave parameters, ∆ SCand ∆ DWas the renormalized quantities by the itinerancy factor Z.
Doping of the holes (electrons) to the correlated system leads to t he complexity pre-
sumably including various collective modes and in this regime, electronic inhomogenity ap-
pears, which makes it diﬃcult to analyze apparently physical proper ties.3,4According to
our scheme, this can be interpreted as natural results by the itine rancy-localization duality
of the quasiparticles. Here, the pseudogap states is a kind of collec tive excitations of the
incoherent background. This is in agreement with the midinfrared ex citation of the optical
spectroscopy,4,15leading to closure of the charge gap before close to the metal stat e.
Another important property is the possibility of the pairing of the qu asiparticles. Charge
carriers move in collective excitations of the incoherent backgroun d that can be considered
as bosonic glue. Even under weak attraction, fermion particles at t he Fermi surface are
unstable to form the bound state.16We consider the system of electrons (holes) and bosons
with mutual interaction.
Hel−b=/summationdisplay
k,qWq(b†
−q+bq)c†
k+qck (4)
whereWqis the interaction matrix element and b†
−qthe boson operator. The eﬀective
interaction between two electrons is obtained by canonical transf ormation, which arises from
the exchange of the boson such as collective modes in analogy with th e phonon exchange.
Veff=/summationdisplay
k,k′,q|Wq|2ω2
q
ω2−ω2qc†
k+qc†
k′−qck′ck (5)
6Forω < ω q, the eﬀective interaction is attractive. The pairing of the carrier is possible
at low frequencies, leading to the superconductor. According to t he BCS formalism, the gap
equation is expressed as below,
∆SC= 2¯hωDexp(−1
NV) (6)
whereNis the density of states at the Fermi surface and ωDis the cutoﬀ frequency of the
collective excitation of incoherent background. The spin wave can b e formed as a possible
candidate of the collective modes, because in Eq. (5), the strong o n-site interaction with
comparedtothehoppingenergyleadstotheHeisenberg hamiltonian , sothattheﬁnite-range
antiferromagnetic ordering exists. This is very analogous to the sp in-bag concept17, but
an important diﬀerence is that the expectation values of two pheno mena, the quasiparticle
pairingandcollectivemodearelinkedbytheitinerancyfactor. Sincet hegapparameter, ∆ SC
is represented as an anomalous Green function, e−2µt/angbracketleftck↑c−k↓/angbracketright, whereµis the Fermi energy,
it implies the factor Zdue to the symmetry of the many-body system. The energy, ¯ hωD
comes from the expectation quantity of the spin wave. Therefore , the critical temperature
can be written as, Tc≃Z(1−Z). Figure 2 shows the change of the critical temperature
with respect to the itinerancy factor Z. Assuming the itinerancy factor is proportional to
the doping carrier, Tcvariation is similar to the experimental results.4This relation can be
valid for the both states of electron and hole doping.
In conclusion, the possibility to interpret the complexity of the stro ngly correlated sys-
tem is proposed within the itinerancy-localization duality of the quasip article. The strong
correlation makes the system reveal the duality of the quasipartic le and new physical phe-
nomena through the interplay between them. This scheme is applicab le to the analysis of
other physical phenomena induced by the strong interaction betw een carriers.
7REFERENCES
†E-mail:bgchae@etri.re.kr
1L. D. Landau, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 30, 1058 (1956) [Soviet Phys. JEPT 3, 920 (1957)].
2A. A. Abrikosov, L. P. Gorkov, andI. E. Dzialoshinski, Methods of Q uantum FieldTheory
in Statistical Physics (Pergamon, Elmsford, New York, 1965).
3E. Dagotto, Science 309, 257 (2005).
4P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X. G. Wen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 17 (2006).
5D. Vollhardt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56, 99 (1984).
6A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, M. J. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Ph ys.68, 13 (1996).
7A. E. Ruckenstein, P. J. Hirschfeld, and J. Appel, Phys. Rev. B 36, 857 (1987).
8H. Lehman, Nuovo Cimento 11, 342 (1954).
9A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z. X. Shen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 473 (2003).
10A.L.FetterandJ.D.Walecka, QuantumTheoryofMany-Particle S ystems (McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1971).
11A. B. Migdal, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 32, 339 (1957) [Soviet Phys. JEPT 5, 333 (1957)].
12J. Hubbard, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 276, 238 (1963).
13W. F. Brinkman and T. M. Rice, Phys. Rev. B 2, 4302 (1970).
14R. Micnas, J. Ranninger, S. Robaszkiewicz, and S. Tabor, Phys. Re v. B37, 9410 (1988).
15M. M. Qazilbash, M. Brehm, Byung-Gyu Chae, P.-C. Ho, G. O. Andree v, Bong-Jun Kim,
Sun Jin Yun, A. V. Balatsky, M. B. Maple, F. Keilmann, Hyun-Tak Kim, a nd D. N.
Basov, Science 318, 1750 (2007).
16J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieﬀer, Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).
817J. R. Schrieﬀer, X. G. Wen, and S. C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 944 (1988).
9FIGURES
Ginch(k,t)Gch(k,t)
Quasiparticle
peak
Incoherent backgroundA(k,Ȧ)
Ȧ İkīk
n(k)
k kFZk(b)
(c)(a)
FIG. 1. (a) A schematic diagram to visualize the duality of th e itineracy and the localization
of quasiparticles. The Green function with a many-body corr elation can be split into a mobile
quasiparticle state, Gchand the incoherent background localized in the lattice site ,Ginch. In
the Fermi liquid state, (b) the spectral density clearly sho ws a quasiparticle peak and incoherent
background and (c) the momentum distribution has discontin uity at the Fermi surface.
100.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Temperature (K)
Itinerancy factor  ZSCPseudogap
stateFermi liquid
metal
FIG. 2. Change in the critical temperature of the supercondu ctivity with respect to the itin-
erancy factor Z. The straight line proportional to 1 - Zindicates a pseudogap temperature from
the incoherent background.
11