arXiv:1001.0876v1  [astro-ph.CO]  6 Jan 2010Studying the kinematics of faint stellar
populations with thePlanetary Nebula
Spectrograph
MichaelR.Merriﬁeld∗andThe PN.SConsortium†
∗Schoolof Physics&Astronomy,University ofNottingham,UK
†http://www.astro.rug.nl/~pns/
Abstract. Galaxiesarefaintenoughwhenoneobservesjusttheirlight distributions,butinstudying
their full dynamical structure the stars are spread over the six dimensions of phase space rather
than just the three spatial dimensions, making their densit ies very low indeed. This low signal is
unfortunate,as stellar dynamicshold important clues to th ese systems’ life histories, and the issue
is compoundedbythe factthat themost interestinginformat ioncomesfromthefaintest outerparts
ofgalaxies,wheredynamicaltimescales(andhencememorie sofpasthistory)arelongest.
Toextractthisinformation,wehaveconstructedaspecial- purposeinstrument,thePlanetaryNeb-
ula Spectrograph, which observes planetary nebulae as kine matic tracers of the stellar population,
and allows one to study the stellar dynamics of galaxies down to extremely low surface bright-
nesses. Here, we present results from this instrument that i llustrate how it can uncover the nature
of low surface-brightnessfeatures such as thick disks by st udying their kinematics, and trace faint
kinematicpopulationsthatarephotometricallyundetecta ble.
Keywords: Galaxydynamics,Planetarynebulae
PACS:98.10.+z,98.62.Dm
INTRODUCTION
Because stars are well-spaced, even the inner parts of galax ies can appear faint, com-
parable in surface brightness to the darkest of night skies. Not surprisingly, then, when
we start exploring the full six-dimensional phase space of v elocities and positions that
starsoccupyingalaxies,thesignalperphasespaceelement becomesalmostvanishingly
small. In the case of the Milky Way, for example, the fascinat ing stellar streams in the
halo[1]havewidthsofonly ∼20pc, andvelocitydispersionsofmaybe ∼10kms−1. If
we were to divide the Galaxy, with a linear dimension of ∼20kpc and velocities span-
ning∼600kms−1, into resolution elements this small, we would end up with ∼1014
of them, many more than there are stars in the Milky Way, so the average occupation
numberperelementwouldbevery smallindeed.
Thus,ifwearetostudythedetailedkinematicsofgalaxies, weneedtodotwothings.
First, we must be able to detect stellar populations at extre mely low phase densities,
which essentially means detecting individual stars. Secon d, we need to come up with
ways to combine the information from these individual detec tions in order to bring
together enough signal to say anything about the properties of the galaxy, and hence
reconstructitsdetaileddynamicalstructureinorderto le arn aboutitsevolution.
Planetary nebulae (PNe) offer an ideal tracer of such faint s tellar populations, asthey are readily individually detectable from their emissi on lines, even in quite distant
galaxies,and the Dopplershiftsin these linescan be used to measure theirline-of-sight
velocities.Tomakesuchmeasurementsefﬁcientlyinasingl estep,wehavedesignedand
built a customized instrument, the Planetary Nebula Spectr ograph or PN.S [2]. In this
paper,wepresentexamplesfromacoupleoftheprojectsthat wehavebeenundertaking
withthisinstrument,toillustratestheprinciplesofinve stigatinggalaxiesintheultimate
low-densityregimeofphasespace.
THETHICK DISKIN NGC 891
When one traces edge-on stellar disks away from the plane out to very low surface
brightnesses, an excess of light above the extrapolation of the normal disk population
is frequently found [3]. The nature of such “thick disks” rem ains highly controversial:
theycouldjustbetheextremetailofthenormaldiskpopulat ion,ortheycouldrepresent
some more dramatic event, such as the debris from a merger. On e exciting new clue
to help distinguish between these possibilities was uncove red when it was found that
the thick disk in the edge-on system FGC 227 appears to be rota ting in the opposite
directiontothenormalthin-diskpopulation,indicatingt hatitwouldhavetobeadistinct
component such as might be formed in a merger [4]. However, th e surface brightness
of this component is so faint that, even with ten hours of inte gration on an 8-metre
telescope, conventional spectroscopy had such large error bars that the data were also
consistentwithco-rotatingthinand thickdisks.
As Figure 1 illustrates, we can do a great deal better with a ra ther shorter integration
on a 4-metre telescope using PN.S. The upper panel shows the n umber counts of PNe
detectedintheedge-onspiralNGC891asafunctionofdistan cefromitsplane.Thelines
show a possible decomposition of the disk into thin and thick exponential components
[5]. The data drop below the model close to the plane, as PNe ar e difﬁcult to detect
against the high surface brightness of the galaxy in this reg ion, and some PNe will also
belostinNGC 891’sstrongdustlane. However,intheregionw eareinterestedin away
from theplane, thePN numbercountstrace thelightdistribu tionvery well, underlining
theirnatureas generic tracers ofthestellarpopulation.F urther, weare clearly detecting
them in signiﬁcant numbers out to beyond the transition wher e the thick disk becomes
thedominantcomponent.
The lower panel in this ﬁgure shows the observed mean rotatio n speed for these PNe
asafunctionofdistancefromtheplane.Thereisplentyofsi gnaltodistinguishbetween
co- and counter-rotating thin and thick disk components, an d in this system the two are
clearly rotating in the same direction. Indeed, we can go fur ther and ﬁt a simplesingle-
componentkinematicmodeltothedata. Thisheuristicmodel isoftheform
/angbracketleftv/angbracketright=α(vc−βσz(z)2/vc), (1)
whereαprovidesthefactorthatallowsfortheline-of-sightproje ctioneffectsthatreduce
the line-of-sight velocity below the mean rotational veloc ity [6], while βparameterizes
allthetermsrelatedtotheshapeofthevelocityellipsoidi ntheasymmetricdriftequation
[7]; here it is assumed to be a constant. The circular speed of the galaxy, vc, can be
inferred from gas kinematics, while the vertical velocity d ispersion, σz(z), is estimatedFIGURE1. Propertiesofthe PNe in thedisk ofthe edge-ongalaxyNGC891 asa functionofdistance
from the galactic plane. The upper panel shows the number cou nts of PNe as detected with PN.S, with
lines showing a model decomposition of conventional photom etry into thin disk and thick disk [5]. The
lower panel shows the mean rotation velocity of these PNe, wi th a line showing the simplest possible
single-populationmodelfortheirkinematics.
by solving the Jeans equation for a self-gravitating sheet w hose density distribution is
given by the double exponential model in the upper panel of Fi gure 1. Clearly, the data
areessentiallyconsistentwiththissimplesingle-compon entmodel:thereisnokinematic
evidencethatthethickdiskin NGC891isin anyway adistinct entity.
A FAINTKINEMATIC POPULATION IN M31
Asafurtherillustrationofthewayinwhichfaintkinematic componentscanbedetected,
Figure2showstheresultsofananalysisofthe2615PNethatw erefoundusingPN.Sin
a survey of M31 [9]. In an inclined disk system like this, the p hase space is essentially
reducedtofourdimensions,twospatialandtwovelocity.We canmeasurethreeofthese
components,twospatialandtheline-of-sightvelocity,so eachPNhasonlyoneunknown
coordinate. Thus, while one cannot measure the energy and an gular momentum of any
single PN, there is only a one-dimensional family of possibi lities, as illustrated by the
linesectionsintheﬁgure. IfgroupofPNeshareacommonorbi t(and henceenergy and
angular momentum), then their lines will all intersect at a s ingle point, creating a local
excess in this plane. Such an excess of crossing lines is, ind eed, found in this ﬁgure, at
the point indicated by the box. The location of the orbit to wh ich it corresponds does
not appear in any way special in an optical imageof M31, but, a s theinset imagein theFIGURE2. Plotofthepossiblevaluesofangularmomentumandenergy(w iththelocalcircularenergy
subtracted, so a circular orbit lies at the bottom of the plot ) for each of the PNe in the M31 survey data.
Thewhite box showsthe pointof the largest local excessof PN e. The inset showsthe orbit to whichthis
pointcorresponds,superimposedona mid-infraredimageof thegalaxy[8].
ﬁgureshows,mid-infrareddatarevealabrightringofemiss ionatthisradius,indicating
that it lies at one of the major orbital resonances. Thus, eit her we have detected the
population of stars born in this ring of star formation, or, m ore likely since PNe come
from old stars, we are picking out the relatively small popul ation of objects that have
become dynamically trapped at this resonance. Whatever the ir origin, these data again
illustrate the power of PN.S to identify kinematic componen ts that are at far too low a
densityin phasespace tobedetectablebymoreconventional means.
REFERENCES
1. V. Belokurov,et al., ApJ642,L137–L140(2006).
2. N.G. Douglas,et al., PASP114,1234–1251(2002).
3. P.Yoachim,andJ.J. Dalcanton, AJ131,226–249(2006).
4. P.Yoachim,andJ.J. Dalcanton, ApJ624,701–713(2005).
5. H. L. Morrison, E. D. Miller, P. Harding, D. R. Stinebring, and T. A. Boroson, AJ113, 2061–2074
(1997).
6. E.Neistein,D. Maoz,H. Rix,andJ. L.Tonry, AJ117,2666–2675(1999).
7. J. Binney,andS. Tremaine, GalacticDynamics:SecondEdition ,PrincetonUniversityPress, 2008.
8. K. Gordon, et al., “The Multiwavelength View of M31 includ ing New Spitzer/MIPS Infrared Im-
ages” inBulletin of the American Astronomical Society , 2004, vol. 36 of Bulletin of the American
AstronomicalSociety ,1579.
9. H.R. Merrett,etal., MNRAS369,120–142(2006).