arXiv:1001.0625v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  5 Jan 2010Spatial distribution functions of random packed granular s pheres obtained by direct
particle imaging
Andreea Panaitescu and Arshad Kudrolli
Department of Physics, Clark University, Worcester, MA 016 10
(Dated: (August 30, 2018))
We measure the two-point density correlations and Voronoi c ell distributions of cyclically sheared
granular spheres obtained with a ﬂuorescence technique and compare them with random packing
of frictionless spheres. We ﬁnd that the radial distributio n function g(r) is captured by the Percus-
Yevick equation for initial volume fraction φ= 0.59. However, small but systematic deviations are
observed because of the splitting of the second peak as φis increased towards random close packing.
The distribution of the Voronoi free volumes deviates from p ostulated Γ distributions, and the
orientational order metric Q6shows disorder compared to numerical results reported for f rictionless
spheres. Overall, these measures show signiﬁcant similari ty of random packing of granular and
frictionless spheres, but some systematic diﬀerences as we ll.
PACS numbers: 45.70.Qj, 05.65.+b
The packing of spheres is one of the enduring prob-
lems in physics, and a basis to understand the structure
and strength ofgranularmatter. Assuming dominanceof
stericinteractions,densepackingofsteelsphereswasﬁrst
used to understand structure of simple liquids with the
radialdistributionfunction g(r)andtheorientationorder
metricQ6[1]. However, experimental measurements at
boundaries [2] and computer simulations in the bulk [3]
have since shown that inter-particle friction can aﬀect
granular packing. Friction between particles changes the
fundamental stability condition at contact from the fric-
tionless case, causing a packing to be protocol dependent
and the system to be out-of-equilibrium.
The diﬃculty of accurately measuring signiﬁcant num-
ber of particle positions in the bulk away from the inﬂu-
ence of boundaries has also stymied progress. Recent ex-
perimental studies [4, 5] have examined packing of gran-
ular spheres and ﬁnd that the associated free volume dis-
tributions are described by a Γ distribution with two ﬁt-
ting parameters which were then given a thermodynamic
interpretation [5]. These results are puzzling in light of
earlier analytical work in one-dimension and simulations
in two and three dimensions that show a Γ distribution
with 3 ﬁtting parameters is needed to describe a broad
range of volume fraction for elastic particles [6].
Here, we discuss new experiments with spherical gran-
ular particles which enable us to directly determine sta-
tistical measures to understand the eﬀect of friction, test
the eﬀect of shear, and perform a rigorous comparison
with frictionless hard sphere packing. Using a ﬂuores-
cence technique [4, 7, 8], we obtain the packing of glass
spheres before and after application of cyclic shear, and
compare with random packing of frictionless spheres. We
ﬁnd that the overall shape of g(r) for volume fraction
φ∼0.6 is captured by the Percus-Yevick equation [9]
which assumes random packing of spheres without angu-
lar correlations. But, systematic deviations are observed
because of the splitting of the second peak as φis in-
creased toward random close packing, Q6shows partial
hexagonal order, and the distribution of the Voronoi free
FIG. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the cyclic shear cell used in
the experiments. (b) An image of the initial packing observe d
in the central vertical slice of the shear cell after particl es
are ﬁlled inside the cell. (c) Ordering grows near the top
boundary which is free to move after 600 shear cycles but
the packing in the bulk appears random. (d) The probability
distribution function of the diameter of the glass beads. (e )
The volume fraction φas a function of shear cycle number
measured in the bulk (red/grey) evolves more slowly than
in the entire cell (black) because of the ordering near the
boundaries.
volumes shows enhanced probabilities at higher values
compared with Γ distributions postulated [6] for random
packing of spheres.
The experiments to measure structure of granular
packing are performed using a shear cell shown schemat-
ically in Fig. 1(a). The parallelepiped shaped cell con-
sists of a rigid front, back, and bottom transparent glass
boundary, andside boundaries that can be tilted through
a prescribed angle θto cyclically shear and perturb the
packing. Glass spheres with density ρg= 2.5×1032
kg m−3and average diameter d= 1.034mm are gently
added inside a shear cell ﬁlled with an interstitial liquid
with the same refractive index as the glass spheres, den-
sityρl= 1.0×103kg m−3, and viscosity ν= 2.2×10−2
Pas. Then a ﬂat plate is placed on the top, which is
constrained to move only in the vertical and horizontal
directionandnot allowedtorotateusingarigidsetoflin-
ear guides. The initial volume fraction of the glass beads
is measuredusingthe massofthe particlesadded and the
volume of the cell occupied and found to be φ= 0.59. A
normal stress σz= 0.4Pa is applied on the top boundary
which is about ﬁve times the net gravitational stress due
to the weight of the grains alone inside the cell, and is
found to eliminate gradientsdue togravityin the system.
A dye is added to the liquid and a thin slice of the
cell is illuminated with a laser and a cylindrical lens [10].
The resulting ﬂuorescent light causes the particles to ap-
pear dark against a bright background, and is imaged
from an orthogonal direction with a resolution of 20 pix-
els to a particle diameter using a 1000 ×1000 pixel 10-
bit camera. A stack of images is recorded by linearly
translating the plane of illumination. We then examine
a 40d×5d×17.5dcentral region as in indicated by box
in Fig. 1(b,c) to avoid any eﬀect of the boundaries, and
locate the absolute position of the spheres to within the
slight polydispersity of the particles (see Fig. 1(d)).
We impose quasi-static shear strain by varying θbe-
tween±π/36 radians with a mean angular speed ω=
8.0×10−3rad s−1, with a wait time of 50s while the stack
of images is acquired every time the system returns to its
original position, θ0= 0rad. The lubrication forces [11]
due to liquid draining at contacts can be estimated to
be 10−5lower than the conﬁning forces, and the particle
Reynolds number is ∼10−1. Therefore the particles can
be assumed to be in contact during the entire experiment
and the interstitial liquid does not have any impact on
the observed structure.
The mean packing volume fraction of the spheres in-
side the entire cell is ﬁrst obtained by measuring the po-
sition of the top plate as a function of the shear cycles.
The mean φis observed to increase logarithmically from
the initial value by 5% (Fig. 1e) consistent with previous
reports with a similar setup [12]. However, it is note-
worthy that this is the total φinside the cell and can
be diﬀerent than φin the bulk because of inﬂuence of
boundaries [10]. Examining the images corresponding to
the initial state of the packing, before applying the shear
deformation, N= 1 and after shearcycle N= 600shown
in Fig. 1(b,c), we indeed note greater ordering near the
top where the boundary shears the spheres and moves to
accommodate changes in the total φ. The boundary be-
tween ordered and disordered region appears sharp and
moves downward as Nis increased further, similar to de-
velopment of crystalline order inside a Couette shear cell
upon extended shearing [7]. Therefore, we focus on the
ﬁrst 600 shear cycles where the particles inside the bulk
in the observation window appear uniformly random and
obtainφfrom the ratio of the particle volume and theφ = 0.605
φ = 0.590
FIG. 2. The radial distribution function g(r) plotted as func-
tion of distance rnormalized by the mean diameter dfor
initial packing φ= 0.59 and ﬁnal packing φ= 0.605 obtained
after shearing, (black), is compared withthetheoretical c alcu-
lation (red/grey) obtained by using the Percus-Yevick equa -
tion, and the measured polydispersity of the beads. The
φ= 0.605 case is oﬀset for clarity. Inset: The calculated
pair distribution functions gijfor particles coarsened to three
sizes (φ= 0.59). The thick red/grey curve represents the av-
erage of the six distinct contributions gij(r) and is used for
comparison with the experimental g(r).
average Voronoi volume in the bulk. The Voronoi vol-
ume is deﬁned by points in the volume closest to that
particle, and is calculated using algorithms written by
Rycroft [13] and measured particle positions. As shown
in Fig. 1(e), the evolution of φin the bulk is observed to
be slower compared with φmeasured for the entire cell
and is used in all subsequent discussion.
To analyze the structure from the measured particle
positions, we ﬁrst discuss the radial distribution function
g(r) which represents the probability that the center of
a particle is found at a distance rfrom another particle.
g(r) obtained from the experimental data is shown in
Fig. 2. For the initial volume fraction φ= 0.59,g(r)
shows a tall peak at r∼d, and a broad peak at r∼
2d, but for the higher φobtained after cyclic shear, the
second peak splits and a weak secondary peak occurs at
r=√
3d, corresponding to the next nearest neighbor in
a face-centered-cubic (FCC) lattice.
Now, the Percus-Yevickequation [9, 14] can be used to
analytically ﬁnd g(r) for randomly distributed particles
for a given particle size, and volume fraction. Because of
the slight polydispersity of the particles used in our ex-
periments, we in fact have to compute the Percus-Yevick
pairdistributionfunction forpolydispersesphericalpack-
ingsgij(r), wheretheindices i,jrepresenttheprobability
ofﬁnding a particle with diameter djat a distance rfrom
a particle with diameter di.
gPY(r) =1
n(n−1)n/summationdisplay
i=1
j≥igij(r) (1)3
(a)
(b)
FIG. 3. (a) The probability distribution of Q6measured for
each particle using Voronoi neighbors are observed to de-
scribed by Gaussian ﬁts. (b) The mean Q6,localmeasured
as a function of φ. The curve is a guide to the eye and shows
thatQ6increase somewhat over the narrow φinvestigated.
herenis the number of particle sizes in the system.
Coarse graining the observed size distribution - shown in
Fig. 1(d) - into three sizes d1= 0.98mm,d2= 1.02mm,
d3= 1.07mm (using a greater ndoes not change the
results signiﬁcantly), we calculate the corresponding six
distinctgij(r) terms, which are plotted in the Inset to
Fig. 2 for φ= 0.59, and thus the computed gPY(r) for
the polydisperse packing according to the Percus-Yevick
approximation, which is plotted in Fig. 2. We observe
that the amplitude and width of the primary peak and
the broad features of the secondary peaks are in good
agreement with the Percus-Yevick approximation. This
comparison is especially noteworthy because there are
no ﬁtting parameters. At higher φ, the primary peak
and the overall form is still captured by the gPY(r), but
details such as the splitting of the second peak which
can indicate hexagonal ordering is not captured because
Percus-Yevick approximation assumes random angular
orientation.
To investigate orientational order in the packing, we
use the orientation order metric
Ql≡N/summationdisplay
i=1/parenleftBigg
4π
l(l+1)m=l/summationdisplay
m=−l|/angbracketleftYlm(Θ(r),Φ(r))/angbracketright|2/parenrightBigg1/2
,(2)where,l= 6 to examine hexagonal order, Ylmare the
spherical harmonics, Θ( r) and Φ(r) are the polar and az-
imuthal angle, respectively, and ris the position vector
from a particle to its neighbor [15]. We deﬁne particle
neighborsasthosewhichshareaVoronoicellsurface[13].
This removes any ambigity as is introduced when consid-
ering only neighbors at contact due to roundoﬀ errors
in ﬁnding a particle center. In order to compare with
packing of elastic particles, we ﬁrst compute Q6,global
by averaging Ylm(Θ(r),Φ(r)) over all the bonds of the
packing, and ﬁnd Q6,global= 0.27±0.02. If particles
neighbors are uncorrelated, then Q6is small because it
goes as square root of the total number of bonds [16].
On the other hand, Q6for a FCC crystal with 12 neigh-
bors is 0.5745. But even a slight perturbation due to
roundoﬀ errors introduces 2 extra neighbors and the cor-
responding Q6is on average 0.454 [17]. Therefore, the
observed distribution shows ordering but the degree of
order appears lower compared with simulations of fric-
tionless hard spheres [18], where Q6as high as 0.4 was
reported for a frictionless hard spheres at comparable φ.
In those studies which were performed with considerably
smaller system size, particle inelasticity was observed to
lowerQ6but not as signiﬁcantly as in our experiments.
To examine the local orientational order more closely,
we plot the observed probability distribution of Q6for
each particle in Fig. 3(a), and the mean of the distribu-
tion/angbracketleftQ6,local/angbracketrightin Fig. 3(b). /angbracketleftQ6,local/angbracketrightis more sensitive
thanQ6,globalto small crystalline regions within a pack-
ing and allows us to avoid the possibility of destructive
interference between diﬀerent crystalline regions [19]. No
signiﬁcant enhancement of distribution is found at the
values corresponding to FCC crystal, and the observed
Q6distribution can be described rather well in fact by
Gaussian ﬁts. From these observations we conclude that
while there is some local hexagonal order which increases
slightly over the φinvestigated, no signiﬁcant crystal-
lites occurin this dense regimeapproachingrandomclose
packing.
A complementary method to examine the packing at
the particle scale is using the free volume vfassoci-
ated with each particle given by subtracting the min-
imum Voronoi volume corresponding to close packing,
vc=d3/√
2 from the Voronoi volume. This statistical
quantity has gained prominence because it may be used
to deﬁne a new measure of entropy based on disorder
in packing [6, 20], and may be amenable to thermody-
namic interpretation [5]. It has been postulated based
on analytical work in 1-dimensional systems, that vfdis-
tribution of random packing of spheres can be described
by a Γ distribution [6]:
f(vf) =δα(m/δ2)
Γ(m/δ2)vf(m/δ−1)e−αvfδ(3)
with three ﬁtting parameters m,δandαthat control dif-
ferent parts of the distribution and were determined by
numerical simulations with frictionless hard spheres [6].
In Fig. 4, we plot vfnormalized by the mean free volume4
FIG. 4. The probability distribution function of the free vo l-
ume associated with a sphere vfnormalized by the mean free
volume/angbracketleftvf/angbracketrightplotted for various φ. The smooth black curve
is obtained after averaging over all the experimental data.
Γ function corresponding to elastic frictionless spheres, the
smooth red/grey curve, is shown for comparison, and is ob-
served to deviate systematically at higher vf. Allowing the
ﬁtting parameters to ﬂoat improves the ﬁt, but systematic
diﬀerences persist for vf>/angbracketleftvf/angbracketright(blue dashed curve).
/angbracketleftvf/angbracketrightat thatφalong with the mean distribution obtained
after averaging over all the measured φ. The errors asso-
ciated with the slightly polydispersity and errors in ﬁnd-
ing particle centersis oforderofsymbol size. Further, we
plot Eq. 3 using m= 15.5,δ= 1.3 reported in Ref. [6],
and allowing αto ﬂoat to obtain best ﬁt. Clearly, sys-
tematicdeviationsareobservedfromthefrictionlesscase,
complementing the results for Q6.In order to check if a Γ-distribution can capture the
experimentally observed free volume distributions, we
tested both the three ﬁtting parameter distribution, and
thetwoﬁttingparameterdistribution, whichcorresponds
to setting δ= 1 in Eq. 3. The best ﬁt obtained with
m= 12.3,α= 24.5, andδ= 0.73 is also shown in Fig. 4.
Even in this case we obtain enhanced probabilities for vf
greater than the mean. Therefore, our distribution diﬀer
from the experimental distributions used to give a sim-
plethermodynamicinterpretationofgranularpacking[5].
While it is possible that such deviations arise because of
the diﬀerences in preparationprotocol, we note no signif-
icant diﬀerences in the distributions obtained before and
after application of cyclic shear in our experiments.
Inconclusion,wemeasuredpackingofgranularspheres
andcomparedexperimentallyobtained two-pointdensity
correlations and free volume distributions before and af-
ter application of shear. We ﬁnd that the radial distri-
bution function is captured overall by the Percus-Yevick
equation, which is important because it is fundamental
to calculating the strength, heat conduction, and electro-
magnetic wave scattering properties of a material. How-
ever, angular correlation can be observed using the ori-
entational order metric. In comparing with numerical
simulations reported for frictionless sphere at compara-
ble volume fractions, we ﬁnd systematic diﬀerences in
packing as measured by lower angular correlations, and
deviation of free volume distributions from Γ distribu-
tions postulated for frictionless hard spheres.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank V. Kumaran, Ashish Orpe, and Michael
Berhanu for many stimulating discussions, and Chris
Rycroft for providing us Voro++ software library. This
work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under NSF Grant No CBET 0853943.
[1] G.D. Scott, Nature 194, 956 (1962); G.D. Scott, and
D.L. Mader, Nature 201, 382 (1964).
[2] D.M. Mueth, H.M. Jaeger, and S.R. Nagel, Phys. Rev. E
57, 3164 (1998).
[3] L.E. Silbert, D. Ertas, G.S. Grest, T.C. Halsey, and D.
Levine, Phys. Rev. E 65, 031304 (2002).
[4] S. Slotterback, M. Toiya, L. Goﬀ, J.F. Douglas, and W.
Losert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 258001 (2008).
[5] T. Aste and T.Di Matteo, Phys. Rev. E 77, 021309
(2008).
[6] V.S. Kumar and V. Kumaran, J. Chem. Phys 123,
114501 (2005).
[7] J.-C. Tsai, G.A. Voth, and J.P. Gollub, Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 064301 (2003).
[8] S. Siavoshi, A.V. Orpe, and A. Kudrolli, Phys. Rev. E
73, 010301 (2006).[9] J. K. Percus and G. J. Yevick, Phys. Rev. 110, 1 (1957).
[10] A.V. Orpe and A. Kudrolli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 238001
(2007).
[11] O. Pitois, P. Moucheront and X. Chateau, J. Colloid.
Interface Sci. 231, 26 (2000).
[12] M. Nicolas, P. Duru, and O. Pouliquen, Europhys. Lett.,
3, 309 (2000).
[13] C.H. Rycroft, G.S. Grest, J.W. Landry, andM.Z. Bazant,
Phys. Rev. E 74, 021306 (2006).
[14] L. Tsang, J.A. Kong, K.H.Ding, andC.O. Ao, Scattering
of Electromagnetic Waves: Numerical Simulation (John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001).
[15] P. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson, and M. Ronchetti, Phys.
Rev. B28, 784 (1983).
[16] M.D. Rintoul and S. Torquato, J. Chem. Phys 105, 9258
(1996).5
[17] P. Richard, L. Oger, J.P. Troadec, and A. Gervois, Phys.
Rev. E60, 062401 (2001).
[18] V.S. Kumar and V. Kumaran, J. Chem. Phys 124,
204508 (2006).[19] A.R. Kansal, T.M. Truskett, and S. Torquato, J. Chem.
Phys113, 4844 (2000).
[20] C. Briscoe, C. Song, P. Wang, and H.A. Makse, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 188001 (2008).