Order In Chaos: Definite Rules T hat Govern The Drift Of Moon 
Away From The Earth  
Sohail Alam  and Dr. B. K. Sharma  
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering  
National Institute of Technology , Patna, India  
Sa4250mnpo70@yahoo.com  , electronics@nitp.ac.in  
 
 
Abstract  
When the Moon was formed it was much closer to the Earth than it is today. It just needed about 20 days 
then to  go around the Earth. Now it takes the Moon 29.5 days to make one revolution. In order to follow 
the conservation of angular momentum the Moon had to either move closer to the Earth or recede from 
Earth. The data from the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment con firms it to be moving away and the velocity 
of recession of the Moon have been found to be 3.8 cm/year. This rate is not constant though. At present 
the Moon's orbit has a radius of 384,000km.  
But what is not yet known to all is that the orbital motion of the moon is actually a spiral motion. The 
moon is spiralling out and a very simple mathematical equation can describe the actual spiral motion of the 
Moon. The generalisation of this differenti al equation is the basic aim of this paper  here.  
 
Keywords - lunar  radial expansion; geo -synchronous orbit; synchronous orbit; LOD Curve;  
 
Introduction  
 
The rock samples brought from our Moon during 
Apollo 11 to Apollo 17 Mission an d during Luna 
16 and Luna 20 Mission conclusively prove that 
Earth and Moon had been formed from the disc of 
accretion about 4.53 billion years ago but they 
were never a single body. The Age of Moon has 
been found incorrect by recent findings. The new 
age is around 4.467 billion years.  Out of the 
many theories finally in 1984 at the International 
Conference held at Kona, Hawaii, Giant Impact 
Theory  was accepted as the most consistent 
theory regarding Moon’s origin . When the Moon was formed it was much closer 
to the Earth than it is today.  It just needed about 
20 days then to go around the Earth.  Now i t takes 
the Moon 29.5 days to make one revolutio n. In 
order to follow the conservation of angular 
momentum the Moon had to eithe r move closer to 
the Earth or recede from Earth. The data from the 
Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment confirms  it to 
be moving  away and the velocity of recession of 
the Moon have been found to be 3.8 cm/year. 
This rate is not constant  though . At present the 
Moon's orbit has a radius of 384,000km.  The first laser ranging retro  reflector was 
positioned on the Moon in 1969 by the Apollo 11 
astronauts. By beaming laser pulses at the 
reflector from Earth, scientists have been able to 
determine the round -trip travel time that gives the 
distance between the two bodies at any time to 
accuracy  of about 3 centimetres .  
The reason for the increase is that the Moon 
raises tides on the Earth. Because the side of the 
Earth that faces the Moon is closer, it feels a 
stronger pull of gravity than the centre of the 
Earth. Similarly, the part of t he Earth facing away 
from the Moon feels less gravity than the centre 
of the Earth. This effect stretches the Earth a bit, 
making it a little bit oblong. We call the parts that 
stick out "tidal bulges." The actual solid body of 
the Earth is distorted a few  centimetres, but the 
most noticeable effect is the tides raised on the 
ocean. Now, all mass exerts a gravitational force, 
and the tidal bulges on the Earth exert a 
gravitational pull on the Moon. Because the Earth 
rotates faster (once every 24 hours) than  the 
Moon orbits (once every 27.3 days) the bulge 
tries to "speed up" the Moon, and pull it ahead in 
its orbit. The Moon is also pulling back on the 
tidal bulge of the Earth, slowing the Earth's 
rotation. Tidal friction, caused by the movement 
of the tidal  bulge around the Earth, takes energy 
out of the Earth and puts it into the Moon's orbit, 
making the Moon's orbit bigger (but, a bit 
paradoxically, the Moon actually moves slower!). 
The Earth's rotation is slowing down because of 
this. One hundred years fr om now, the day will be 2 milliseconds longer than it is now. This same 
process took place billions of years ago --but the 
Moon was slowed down by the tides raised on it 
by the Earth. That's why the Moon always keeps 
the same face pointed toward the Earth. Because 
the Earth is so much larger than the Moon, this 
process, called tidal locking, took place very 
quickly, in a few tens of millions of years. Many 
physicists considered the effects of tides on the 
Earth -Moon system. However, George Howard 
Darwin (Cha rles Darwin's son) was the first 
person to work out, in a mathematical way, how 
the Moon's orbit would evolve due to tidal 
friction, in the late 19th century. He is usually 
credited with the invention of the modern theory 
of tidal evolution.  
There is a tim e lag between Earth -Moon 
interaction and Earth's deformation. It is this time 
lag and belated deformation of Earth which 
causes a retarding torque on Earth. The two 
bulges act as brake -shoes as these brake -shoes act 
in Cycle wheel.  
 
 
 Problem Definition  
It was established a century ago by George 
Howard Darwin that Earth -Moon interaction is 
causing Lunar Orbital Radius expansion and 
Secular Lengthening of Day (L.O.D). This paper  intends  to study the  generalisation of the  
theoretical formulation of Lunar Orbital Radius 
Expansion.  
 
Details about the Problem  
When a capacitance is being charged from a 
constant voltage source usi ng a resistance,  the 
capacitance voltage exponentially grows or 
decays with the time constant of growth or decay 
given by T = RC. Is there some such formulation 
in the orbital radius expansion or contraction 
curve? Is there a similar time constant here? A nd 
if indeed there is time constant what does it 
depend upon? By the studies conducted till now 
we have defined a time constant T = 𝑎𝐺2−𝑎𝐺1
𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥 
where a G1 is inner geosynchronous orbit, a G2 is 
outer geosynchronous orbit  and V max is the 
maximum velo city of recession as a result of  
gravitational sling shot effect.  
But what is not yet known to all is that the orbital 
motion of the moon is actually a spiral motion. 
The moon is spiralling out and a very simple 
mathematical equation can describe the actu al 
spiral motion of the Moon. The generalisation  of 
this differential equation is the basic aim of this 
paper  here. It has been shown in the thesis of Dr. 
Bijay Kumar Sharma, named as “THE 
DYNAMICS OF PLANETARY SATELLITES 
AND THE GENERALIZATION OF THE SAME 
PROVIDES A NEW THEORY OF THE BIRTH 
AND EVOLUTION OF OUR SOLAR 
SYSTEM”  that in any two body system there are two Geo -synchronous orbits 
1Ga  and 
2Ga . 
When the secondary is tidally locked with the 
primary as all the natural satellites are, then they 
are called synchronous motion.  Moon is in 
synchronous motion. Hence we see the  same face 
of Moon eternally. Whereas , Charo is tidally 
interlocked with Pluto. This is analogous to geo -
synchrony. Charon spin period= Charon's orbital 
period= Pluto’s  spin period. If Moon was tidally 
interlocked with Earth then Moon would be 
permanently fixed over a given point say Patna 
(the capital of Bihar, INDIA) as a geo -
synchronous satellite is. Plus when secondary 
body is in sub -synchronous orbit, angular 
momentum is transferred from Moon to Earth 
(secondary to primary body). Therefore Moon 
gets tr apped in a contracting spiral orbit. If it was 
in extra synchronous orbit then angular 
momentum would be transferred from Earth to 
Moon as presently it is happening and Moon is 
receding at the rate of 3.8cm. The Geo -
Synchronous orbits may be defined as that  where 
the spin period of the secondary body  equals that 
of the Primary  as well and the orbital period of 
the Secondary  equals the spin period of the 
Primary . If the accreting body or the captured 
body, as is the case for Martian Satellite Phobos, 
lies wit hin 
1Ga  then the Satellite is gravitationally launched on an inward spiral path 
towards its sure doom. If the accreting zone lies 
beyond 
1Ga  as is the case with our Moon or the 
captured body lies beyond 
1Ga  as is the case for 
the Martian Satellite Deimos, then the said 
satellite experiences an impulsive, gravitational 
sling shot effect because of Conservation of 
Energy Principle.  It has rightly  been  assumed by Dr. B.K. Sharma  
that the trajectory of evolution obeys the  rules 
analogous  to Fourier expansion series having the 
form  𝐀ⅇ−𝐭
𝟑𝐓+𝐁ⅇ−𝐭
𝟐𝐓+𝐂ⅇ−𝐭
𝐓+⋯  where A, B, 
C … are some constants . Here we approximate  
the differential equation to be of third order only, 
(it can be of higher order  but the mathematics get 
quite involved above order eight or nine, but the 
basic formulation is the same).  
 
 
The Figure represents the Spiral Trajectory of Moon traversed from the birth to the present Orbit of 
3.844x10^8m over  4.53Gy of time period. (Ref. 4)  
 
All these mathematical formulation has been 
done using Wolfram Mathematica 7 software . 
Let us take the case of a polynomial whose roots 
are -1/T, -1/2T and -1/3T. 
𝐏𝐨𝐥𝐲𝐧𝐨𝐦𝐢𝐚𝐥=(𝒙+1
𝑻)(𝒙+1
2𝑇)(𝒙+1
3𝑇) On expansion using the Expand  command we get 
the following result  
𝟏
𝟔𝑻𝟑+𝒙
𝑻𝟐+𝟏𝟏𝒙𝟐
𝟔𝑻+𝒙𝟑 
Now observing the above expression we 
construct a differential equation as follows  
 
Consider 𝐫𝐋 to be the radial distance of the Moon 
from Earth and 𝐚𝐠𝟏 and 𝐚𝐠𝟐 are the first and 
second Geo -synchronous orbit respectively. Then 
consider  
𝐱=𝐚𝐠𝟐−𝐫𝐋
−𝐚𝐠𝟏+𝐚𝐠𝟐 
 
Now solving the differential equation using 
DSolve  command  
𝐃𝐒𝐨𝐥𝐯𝐞 𝐱′′′ 𝐭 =
=−𝟏𝟏 𝟔𝐓  𝐱′′ 𝐭 −𝟏𝐓𝟐 𝐱′ 𝐭 
−𝟏 𝟔𝐓𝟑  𝐱 𝐭 ,𝐱 𝐭 ,𝐭  
The solution is  
𝐚𝐠𝟐−𝐫𝐋
−𝐚𝐠𝟏+𝐚𝐠𝟐=𝐂 𝟏 ⅇ−𝐭
𝟑𝐓+𝐂 𝟐 ⅇ−𝐭
𝟐𝐓+𝐂 𝟑 ⅇ−𝐭
𝐓  
where C[1],C[2],C[3] are the three constants of 
integration.   
This solution is exactly what we have assumed to 
be.  
There  are four  unknowns  here  C[1],C[2],C[3],T 
Also any of the following boundary conditions 
may be used  
rL= a G2 at t=infinity  and  
rL = a G1 at t= 0  
And in case of Earth -Moon system the two Geo -
synchronous orbits have been found to be  
ag1= 1.46257569*107 m 
ag2= 5.52887891*108 m 
We know from Laser Lunar Ranging Experiment 
that the Moon is at a distance of 3.844*108 m 
from the Earth at present, after 4.53*109 years 
after the Giant Impact.  
Hence, rL= 3.844*108 at t= 4.53*109 
 
                                                                                 
 
Results and discussion  
All we have to do is find the constants of 
integration and the Time Constant of Evolution.  
The Time Constant was found out to be 
T=3.90028×109, by solving the following 
equation  
𝐒𝐨𝐥𝐯𝐞 𝟏−ⅇ−𝟒.𝟓𝟑×𝟏𝟎𝟗𝐓 ==𝟎.𝟔𝟖𝟔𝟗𝟕,𝐓  
Now satisfying different points in space at which 
the Moon was present at time t  (after the Giant 
Impact ), we get simultaneous equations containing  the constants of integration C[1],  C[2],  
C[3].  
For example satisfying the following points  
rL  = 2.227*108 at t=1.73*109,  rL= 3.844*108 at t= 
4.53*109 , and rL = a G1 at t= 0 and solving for 
C[1],  C[2],  C[3] we get  
C[1]=  1.88839, C[2]=  -2.72107, C[3]=  1.83268  
 
 
Now putting these values of T,  C[1],  C[2] and 
C[3] and plotting the radial distance with respect 
to time we get the following curve : 
 Also on plotting the different points  in space at 
any given time where the moon would have been 
possibly present  using the data generated by Prof. 
B.K.Sharma we get the experimental curve as 
follows : 
 
 
Summary  
It can be seen that the m oon actually is moving 
outward and is approaching for its outer geo -
synchronous orbit. Also when the two plotted 
graphs are compared we find a very accurate 
match . We need to study the orbital radius  
expansion or contraction and  see if they fit in a 
general formulation.  Also these formulations will 
the give some very significant idea about the 
Lengthening of Day (L.O.D).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Future Directions  
There are several causative factors for the 
deviations in the actual sidereal day L.O.D.  
Curve  with respect to the theoretical L.O.D. curve 
as predicted on the basis of Earth -Moon Tidal 
Interaction. Because it has a causative factor 
hence the deviations a re not random but chaotic. 
If they are indeed chaotic they should be carrying 
the signatures of the various causative factors 
such as plate -tectonics, ice -caps expansion and 
thawing, electromagnetic coupling between core 
and mantle, El -Nino Ocean Currents and global 
wind pattern interactions with various mountain 
ranges. If the various signatures are identified 
then we may isolate the precursors of Earth -quake and sudden Volcanic Eruptions in L.O.D. curve 
fluctuations. With the advent of quantum gyro 
develo ped at University of California, Berkeley, 
it should not be difficult to identify the 
fluctuations which characterize the plate -tectonic 
movements. These fluctuations will be 
categorized according to the magnitude of 
tremors. Certain categories will act as  the 
precursors of Earthquakes also.  
We must also study the orbital radius expansion 
or contraction  of satellites  and see if they fit in a 
general formulation. Among the natural satellites 
we will cover Moon, Phobos, Deimos, Charon, 
Titan and a few other l arge sized satellites.  
 
References  
 
1. Dr. BijayKumar  Sharma, The 
Dynamics of Planetary Satellites and 
the Generalization of the same 
provides  a new theory of Birth and 
Evolution of Our Solar System . 
2. Measuring the Moon's Distance  
(Apollo Laser Ranging Experiments 
Yield Results ), From LPI Bulletin, 
No. 72, August, 1994  
http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEhelp/Ap
olloLaser.html   3. Moon Mechanics: What Really Makes 
Our World Go 'Round 
http://www.space.com/scienceastrono
my/moon_mechanics_0303018.html  
4. "Software for generating the Spiral 
Trajectory of our Mo on", BKS et al, 
Journal of Advances in Space 
Research, Vol.43,  (2009),  pp460 -466, 
2nd Feb 2009.  
 <The actual Spiral Trajectory can be 
found here.>  
 
---------------  
……..  
 