arXiv:1001.0199v1  [astro-ph.IM]  4 Jan 2010Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XVII C.10
ASP Conference Series, Vol. XXX, 2008
J. Lewis, R. Argyle, P. Bunclarck, D. Evans, and E. Gonzales- Solares, eds.
Planning and Executing Airborne Astronomy Missions for
SOFIA
Michael A. K. Gross and Ralph Y. Shuping
Universities Space Research Association, NASA/Ames Resea rch Center,
MS 211-3, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035 USA
Abstract. SOFIA is a 2.5 meter airborne infrared telescope, mounted in
a Boeing 747SP aircraft. Due to the large size of the telescope, only a few
degrees of azimuth are available at the telescope bearing. This mean s the head-
ing of the aircraft is fundamentally associated with the telescope’s o bservation
targets, and the ground track necessary to enable a given mission is highly com-
plex and dependent on the coordinates, duration, and order of ob servations to
be performed. We have designed and implemented a Flight Managemen t In-
frastructure (FMI) product in order to plan and execute such mis sions in the
presence of a large number of external constraints (e.g. restric ted airspace, in-
ternational boundaries, elevation limits of the telescope, aircraft performance,
winds at altitude, and ambient temperatures). We present an over view of the
FMI, including the process, constraints and basic algorithms used t o plan and
execute SOFIA missions.
1. Introduction
The Flight Management Infrastructure (FMI) product is inte nded to keep the
aircraft from interfering with preplanned observations on the sky. It predicts
the ground tracks necessary to execute its mission, and corr ects the plan for
actual conditions while airborne. To support this, it conta ins both a planning
component that can run on the ground and in the air, and an exec ution com-
ponent that runs in the air. The planning component manages a set of ordered
observations and optional aircraft repositioning request s. The execution com-
ponent compares the plan to actual conditions in ﬂight and re quests headings
(indirectly) from the autopilot.
SOFIA mission planning diﬀers from satellite or ground based observatory
planning in a few key areas. Most importantly, the observato ry position is a
function of observation target history, which prevents obs ervations from being
considered as time-slots alone. Assignment of ﬂight dates i s also nontrivial
— targets cannot be localized on the sky or the observatory wi ll always ﬂy
in about the same direction (requiring nearly equivalent de ad time to return);
this suggests entire ﬂight series should be considered at on ce, for greater target
variety.
Flight planning and execution diﬀers from conventional as we ll. All con-
ventional aircraft ﬂy from point to point along speciﬁed pat hs on the ground,
and “drift” the aircraft to compensate for winds. Typical dr ift angles (course
- heading) exceed 3◦, and the worst possible case approaches 30◦, so SOFIA
cannot necessarily observe in this manner. Expected winds c an be planned
12 Gross and Shuping
for using a weather forecast. Correcting course for unexpected winds can be
accomplished by adjusting observation durations, by reloc ating the aircraft be-
tween observations, or by “observation triage” as a last res ort. This requires
an astronomically-aware airborne monitoring function to c ompare current con-
ditions to plan. Aircraft capabilities are a strong functio n of fuel weight, which
argues against simple parametrizing by time, in favor of fue l.
2. External Constraints
In addition to the geometrical and practical constraints de scribed above, the
SOFIA ﬂight planning problem also has a number of external co nstraints, all of
which prevent a truly automated, or even rigorously sequent ial, ﬂight planning
process. Forinstance, specialuseairspace(SUA)incursio nsmayrequireexternal
approval, and it cannot be known ahead of time whether such ap proval will be
forthcoming in all cases. National airspace boundaries req uire international
agreements. Over-ocean operations are prohibited for safe ty reasons for the ﬁrst
ﬂights; forlaterﬂights, fairlycomplexfuelreserveconst raintsarerequired. Gross
takeoﬀ weight has a hard limit of 700,000 pounds, which limit s the duration of
SOFIA missions.
Some science-driven constraints require interaction with scientists or de-
tailed knowledge of the observations; especially, trading oﬀ water vapor over-
burden estimates with altitude and duration, and for tradin g oﬀ observations
against each other.
3. SOFIA FMI
Prior to any particular mission, several iterations of ﬂigh t planning are per-
formed. This is expected to include fully integrated automa ted ﬂight planning
(Frank, Gross, & K¨ urkl¨ u 2004), routinely. Manual choice o f observation (in-
cluding order) will occur subsequently. Upon execution, re planning might oc-
cur if conditions are suﬃciently diﬀerent from assumptions. Figure 1 shows a
color-processed screenshot of a simulated ﬂight intended f or April, 2008, from
Palmdale, CA. Actual conditions for the simulation shown di ﬀer from planned
only by small timing errors of the order of several seconds be tween segments
and at takeoﬀ.
As mentioned earlier, it is advantageous to consider entire ﬂight series at
once, in order to trade observations between ﬂights. The dat a structure sup-
porting this is shown in Fig. 2.
FMI requires substantial input data in order to accurately p redict a ﬂight
track and its constraints. Weather forecast time-series ar e taken from the Na-
tional Center for Environmental Prediction Global Forecas ting System, quadri-
linearly interpolated. An alternative is required for date s more than several
days in the future, since accurate forecasts are not availab le then; we use a
set of stacked monthly means for 1997–2001 (the last years av ailable) from the
European Center for Medium Ranger Weather Forcasting 40 Yea r Reanalysis
(Uppala et. al. 2005) also quadrilinearly interpolated. Ai rcraft performance is
interpolated from tables generated by Boeing INFLT runs, fo r cruising, thrust-
limited climbs, and descents.Planning and Executing SOFIA Missions 3
Figure 1. A sample ﬂight in southern California airspace, executing in
a simulated environment. Coastlines and Arizona and Nevada border s are
shown as coarsely dotted lines. Planned and actual tracks are sho wn as solid
lines. Since actual conditions never exactly match plans, the remain der of the
ﬂight is projected from the current actual location, shown as a da shed line.
Oﬀshore polygons are warning zones; others are restricted airsp ace. The cur-
rent position and heading is shown as an aircraft glyph, near Santa B arbara,
CA.
Flight
series
Flight
plan
Flight
leg
WaypointFlight
leg
trackingNot Tracking
fixed target moving targetTrackingFuel loadFlight Plan:Start date/time
Start airport/rwyWaypoint:lat/lon/UT
altitude
heading
airspeed
water vapor estimate
telescope elevation
moon angle
sun elevation
pitch angle
telescope azimuth biascourse
ground speed
field rotation
remaining fuelFlight Leg:Obs ID or
RA/dec/dur or
hdg/dur or
lat/lon or
ending airport/rwy;
end altitude0..n
0..n
3..n
Figure 2. Structure of a ﬂight series, corresponding to all ﬂights b etween a
given instrument’s installation and its removal.
Planned ﬂight track intersections with special use airspac e (SUA) bound-
aries (including non-US zones, from the US National Imagery and Mapping
Agency) are evaluated using a quadtree-based search on the 8 000+ SUA bound-
aries for each ﬂight segment. Observation segments are trea ted as initial value
problems in Cartesian coordinates, others may be boundary o r initial problems,
as appropriate. Desired headings are calculated during exe cution from planned
(not actual) sky coordinates and actual position; direct st eering by the telescope
cannot be allowed for safety reasons.4 Gross and Shuping
In order to test FMI components and integrate other systems, as well as for
training purposes, we use a simulation environment. This in cludes a medium-
ﬁdelity aircraft simulator, an automated pilot simulator, a method to set the
time arbitrarily, and a telescope simulator (Br¨ uggenwirt h, Gross, Nelbach, &
Shuping 2008).
Leg constructor
(API)
Manual
flight
plannerSolved
flight
series(API)flight plannerAutomated
Obs
plans
Flight
executor
(backend)Leg target
order,
duration
Leg target
order,
duration
Flight
seriesWinds, water vapor,
temperature,
aircraft performance,
airspace
MCCS ProxyMD or
operatorTweaks
ResponsesSCL
SCL
subscribesMCCS (PIS)HousekeepingA/C Position, attitude, etc.
Figure3. Dataﬂowwithin the airborneconﬁgurationforearlyﬂights . Later
ﬂights will have direct connections to the data acquisition system (M CCS),
rather than through a proxy.
While airborne, the FMI software components interact with t he airborne
data acquisition software to acquire the aircraft’s positi on and attitude. While
on the ground, the planner portion of FMI interacts with obse rvers’ planning
software and must support multiple simultaneous planning s essions. The air-
borneconﬁgurationisshowninFig. 3; thegroundconﬁgurati onissimilar, except
thereis noﬂight executor norMCCS data(except in testing co nﬁgurations), and
there is a connection to the Observation Planning Database.
4. Conclusion
SOFIA presents a unique ﬂight planning problem due to the nat ure of astro-
nomical observation. FMI provides a connection between sci entiﬁc needs of an
observatory with the practical constraints of operating an aircraft, without in-
troducing excessive safety considerations or pilot worklo ad, or planner eﬀort.
Acknowledgments. The authors wish to thank the European Center for
Medium Range Weather Forecasting for access to their reanal ysis data.
References
Br¨ uggenwirth, S., Gross, M. A. K., Nelbach, F. J., & Shuping, R. Y. 2 009, in ASP
Conf. Ser. XXX, ADASS XVII, ed. J. Lewis, R. Argyle, P. Bunclark, D. Evans,
& E. Gonzalez-Solares (San Francisco: ASP), 485
Frank, J., Gross, M. A. K., & K¨ urkl¨ u, E. 2004, in Proc. 16th Conf . on Innovative Appli-
cations of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ed. D. L. McGuinness & G. Ferguso n (Boston:
MIT Press), 828
Uppala, S. M. et al. 2005, Quart. J. R. Meterol. Soc.,131, 2961