 1 Stability of Multipole-mode So litons in Thermal Nonlinear 
Media 
Liangwei Dong1*, Fangwei Ye 2 
1Institue of Information Optics of Zhe jiang Normal University, Jinhua, China, 321004 
2Department of Physics, Centre for Nonlinear Studies,  
and The Beijing-Hong Kong-Singapore Joint Centre 
 for Nonlinear and Complex System(Hong Kong), 
Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, China 
*Email: donglw@zjnu.cn 
We study the stability of multipole-mode solitons in one-dimensional thermal nonlinear media. We show how the sample  geometry impacts the stability of 
mutlipole-mode solitons and reveal that th e tripole and quadrupole can be made stable 
in their whole domain of existence, provided that the sample width exceeds a critical 
value. In spite of such geometry-dependent  soliton stability, we find that the maximal 
number of peaks in stable multipole-mode solitons in thermal media is the same as 
that in nonlinear materials with finite-range nonlocality. 
PACS number(s): 42.65.Tg, 42.65.Jx, 42.65.Wi  
Solitons in nonlinear media can take a va riety of forms and shapes. In addition 
to the node-less amplitude distributions fe atured by fundamental solitons, solitons 
could also display complex spatial shapes. In one-dimensional system, these are dipole-modes which are composed of two out-of-phase fundamental solitons, or  2 multipole-mode solitons which are composed of several fundamental solitons with 
alternating phases. Due to the repulsive fo rces between the peak s of them, multipole 
soliton can not exist in uniform media with  local nonlinear responses, except in the 
form of vector solitons under suitable c onditions. However, such situation changes 
significantly in nonlocal nonlinear media, where,  in sharp contrast to the case in local 
media, out-of-phase bright solitons can attr act each other and may even, form scalar 
bound states [1].    
The nonlocality of the nonlinear response is a generic property of nonlinear 
materials. Nonlocality arises when the light-matter interaction involves mechanism 
such as diffusion of carriers, reorientation of molecules, heat transfer, etc [2, 3]. 
Recent interest in the study of nonlocal  solitons has been stimulated by the 
experiments in nematic liquid crystals (NLCs) [4-7] as well as in thermal materials such as lead glasses [8, 9]. The nonlocal nonlinear responses of these two materials 
could be quite different. The nonlinear respons e of a NLC is charac terized by a finite 
nonlocality degree, thus when the size of the sample is large enough relative to the 
spatial extent of the light, the boundary of a NLC does not affect the light dynamics or 
soliton properties. In contrast, in a thermal medium, the nonlinear response is always greatly determined by the details of heat  diffusion at sample boundaries and thus the 
nonlocality degree is naturally  “infinite” as the afar boun daries could significantly 
change the light dynamics and soliton proper ties [12-18], even when spatial extent of 
the light beam is significant small compared  with that of the sample. Especially, 
numerical simulations [14] ha ve demonstrated that the so liton stability may depend  3 crucially on the sample-geometry and a recta ngular sample with a proper aspect ratio 
may stabilize the otherwise unstable dipole mode s in a square sample. Note that such 
strongly sample-geometry-dependent sol iton properties are specific to thermal 
materials and are usually abse nt in both local and finite -range nonlocal materials. 
The present work is motivat ed by the study of Z. Xu et al. in Ref. [11], where 
the authors have revealed that, in a nonlinea r material with a finite-range nonlocality 
such as in a NLC, the maximal number of peaks in stable multipole-mode solitons is 
four and the modes containing more than four peaks are always unstable. As the 
authors in Ref. [11] deal with a material  with a finite-range nonlocality, no boundary 
effects have been took into consideration. In  contrast, in nonlocal thermal materials, 
boundary is always crucial, and therefor e, one may naturally ask, how a thermal 
nonlinear material affects the stability of multipoles? Especially, one might ask whether a nonlinear response of an infi nite-range nonlocality supports stable 
multipoles composed of more peaks than th at supported by a fin ite-range nonlocality? 
It is worthy to mention that, the physical model describing light propagation in a NLC 
without the static bias electri c field is mathematically equi valent to that in a thermal 
nonlinear medium, thus, boundary effects may also come into play in a NLC, as numerically analyzed and experimentally observed in [24,25]. Therefore our present 
study may also find potential applications in liquid crystals, although we following 
put our research in the context of  thermal nonlocal materials.   
The purposes of this paper are tw ofold. First, we study whether the 
sample-geometry-dependent soliton stability in  thermal materials, which was revealed  4 in two-dimensional settings where the contro lling parameter being the sample aspect 
ratio, also persists in one-dimensional ge ometry when the controlling parameter 
simply being the sample width. Indeed, we find that the stability of multipole-mode solitons depends crucially on the physical dimension of the thermal material, and complete stability is achieved for tri pole- and quadrupole-mode solitons when the 
width of the sample exceeds some crucial value. We are able to build this important finding on a rigorous linear stability analysis , which is absent in higher-dimensional 
settings [14] due to the requirement of huge computational resources. The second 
purpose of this paper is to reveal the maxi mum number of peaks in stable multipoles 
that hold in a thermal nonlinear medium. This purpose stems from the first one, as the stability characteristics of multipoles now cr ucially depends on sample width and thus 
the stability analysis for NLCs [11] does not hold in thermal nonlinear media. 
Surprisingly, we found that a nonlin ear thermal medium possesses the same 
restriction on the maximum number of peaks in stable multipoles as in the case of a 
finite-range nonlocal medium. In another word, the maximal number of peaks in 
stable multipoles supported by thermal materi als is also four and all modes composed 
of five peaks or more are unstable. 
We consider the propagation of a laser beam along the 
z axis of a thermal 
medium occupying the region /2 /2Lx L-£ £ + ( L is the sample width), which 
can be described by the system of equati ons for the dimensionless field amplitude q 
and the nonlinear contribution to the refractive index n that is proportional to the 
temperature variation, given by  5 2
2
22
21,2
,qqiq nz x
nq
x¶¶=- -¶ ¶
¶=-
¶  (1) 
Here the transverse and longitudinal coordinate ,xz are scaled to the beam width 
and to the diffraction length, respectively.  We assume that the opposite boundaries 
of the thermal medium are thermostabilized, thus,/2,| 0xLqn==. 
  We search for soliton solutions of Eqs. (1) in the form () e x p ( ) qw x i b z= , 
where w is a real function and b is the propagation constant . Such solitons can be 
characterized by their energy flow/22
/2||L
LUq d x
-=ò, which is a conserved quantity 
of Eqs.(1). The refractive index induced by the soliton is given 
by/22
/2(, ' ) | ( ' ) | 'L
LnG x x q x d x
-=-ò, where the response function 
1(, ' ) ( / 2 ) ( ' / 2 )Gxx L x L x L-=+ - for ' xx£ and 
1( , ' ) ( ' /2 ) ( /2 )Gxx L x L x L-=+ - for ' xx³ . To elucidate the linear stability of 
solitons we searched for perturbed solution in the form of 
**( , ) [ ( ) ( )exp( ) ( )exp( )]exp( )qxz wx ux iz v x i z i b z dd =+ + - , where the perturbation 
modes u and v can grow with a complex rate d upon propagation(“ *” stands for 
complex conjugate). Linearization of  Eqs. (1) around stationary solution ()wx  
yields, 
/2
/2
/2
/21( ,' )(' ) [(' ) (' ) ] ' ,2
1(, ' )( ' ) [( ' ) ( ' ) ] ' ,2L
xx
L
L
xx
Luu b u u n w G x x w x u x v x d x
v v bv vn w G x x w x u x v x dxd
d-
-=- + + +
=- + - - +ò
ò   (2)  6 Figure 1 (a) presents an example for funda mental solitons. As shown in the figure, 
the induced refractive index ()nx is nonzero across the whole sample, which is due to 
the infinite range of nonlo cality. Note also that the ()nx  produced by the dipole 
displays a maximum platform near 0 x=[Fig. 1 (b)], rather a small dip encountered 
in a NLC [11].  Such index platform expa nds for lower-power dipoles [Fig. 1(c)].  
The dependence of energy flow Uversus propagation constant bis shown in Fig.1 
(d). We find that fundamental and dipole so litons are stable in their whole domain of 
existence. 
Thermal nonlinear media in principle s upport bound states with arbitrary number 
of peaks. This can be explained from their associated index profiles, as ()nx always 
features a parabolic-like shape across the w hole light regions [Fi g. 2(a), Fig. 2(d) and 
Fig. 3(a)]. The stability analysis for tr ipole and quadrupole-mode solitons is 
summarized in Fig.2. An important result is th at the stability of solitons is strongly 
dependent on the sample width, and inst ability domain shrinks  quickly with the 
increase of the sample width [Fi g. 2(c) and (f)]. For example, when 20 L= , tripole 
modes are stable in the region 0.7crbb>» . However, when Lis increased to 
40 L=  the stable region expands to 0.15crbb>» [Fig. 2 (b)]. Further, 
completely stable are achieved if 60 L> . Such sample-width-dependent stability 
characteristics are also observed for quadrup ole solitons [Fig. 2(e)]. However, it 
should be mentioned that the instability region, defined by [0, ]crbbÌ , for 
quadrupoles is wider than that for tripol e. Also the instab ility growth rate 
id(imaginary part of d) for quadrupole is higher than th at for tripoles. Note that, as  7 mentioned above, such geometry-dependent st ability have been reported recently in 
two-dimensional thermal media for dipole so litons [14], where the dipole modes with 
correct orientation with respect to sample ge ometry are found to be stable provided 
that the sample is cut into a suitable geom etrical aspect ratio. However, the finding in 
[14] is based on the propagation simulations wh ile a linear stability analysis is absent 
as the latter requires huge computational re sources. In contrast, here we work on a 
most fundamental system, thus allowing us to build the im portant result of 
geometry-dependent-stability on a ri gorous linear stability analysis.  
Another important finding of our stability  analysis is that, although the soliton 
stability in thermal materials has a pr ofound dependence on the sample-width as 
discussed above, the maximum number of p eaks in stable multipoles is still four, 
which is the same as in a nonlinear medi um with a finite-ra nge nonlocality. Thus, 
bound states incorporating five [Fig.3 (a)] or more than five peaks are always 
oscillatory unstable. Such global instability holds irrespective of variation of energy 
flow [Fig.3 (b)] or sample wi dth, although the specific value of id quantitatively 
depends on both. The same re striction on the maximal numb er of peaks in stable 
multipoles for a thermal medium and a NLC might counter one’s intuition, as in NLC 
the instability domain decreases with the in crease of nonlocality degree [11], thus for 
a thermal medium with an infinite range  of nonlocality and a strong dependence of 
stability on sample-geometry, one might expect  that the maximal number of peaks in 
stable multipoles might be larger than four or at least different with that. However,  8 our results here reveal that thermal non linear media actually possess the same upper 
threshold for stability as that in NLCs.  All results reported above are confirmed by the outcome of the direct numerical 
integration of Eqs. (1) with the input condition 
(, 0 ) () [ 1 () ]qxz wx x r == + , where  
()wx  is the profile of th e stationary wave and ()xr stands for the broadband input 
noise with the variance 2
noise0.01s= . As expected, the multipole-mode that belong 
to the stable region predicted by linear stability analysis retain their shapes over 
indefinitely long propagation di stance, as clearly seen in Fig. 4(a) for a dipole mode, 
and Fig. 4(d) for a quadrupole mode. Note th at, Figure 4(c) shows propagation result 
for another quadrupole mode at a smaller sa mple width (all the other parameters are 
the same as those in Fig. 4(d)). In contra st with that in wider sample, this quadrupole 
experiences oscillatory instability and destr oys itself. Finally, all fifth-order solitons 
experience the similar instab ility scenario [Fig.4 (b)]. 
In conclusion, we studied the stability charact eristics of bound states composed of 
several field peaks in thermal nonlinear medi a with an infinite-range nonlocality. We 
found that the stability of tr ipole- and quadrupole-mode so liton depends crucially on 
the sample width, and they can be completely stable when the sample width exceeds a critical value. We based the result of sa mple-width-dependent soliton stability on a 
rigorous linear stability analysis with co llaboration by direct propagation simulations. 
Thermal nonlinear media cannot support stab le bound modes containing more than 
four peaks, thus they posse ss the same restriction on the maximal number of peaks in  9 sable multipoles as that in nonlinear media with finite-range of nonlocality, although 
their nonlocal nonlinear responses  are essentially different.  
This work was supported by the Nationa l Natural Science Foundation of China 
(Grant No. 10704067).   10 References  
1. M. Peccianti, K. A. Brzdkiewicz, and G. Assanto , Opt. Lett.  27, 1460(2002). 
2. W. Krolikowski, O. Bang, N. I. Nikolov, D. Neshev, J. Wyller, J. J. Rasmussen, 
and D. Edmundson,  J. Opt. B 6, S288 (2004). 
3. M. Peccianti, C. Conti, and G. Assanto, Opt. Lett.  30, 415(2005). 
4. C. Conti, M. Peccianti, and G. Assanto, Phys. Rev. Lett.  91, 073901(2003). 
5. C. Conti, M. Peccianti, and G. Assanto , Phys. Rev. Lett.  92,113902(2004). 
6. M. Peccianti, C. Conti, and G. Assanto, “Optical multisoliton generation in 
nematic liquid crystals,” Opt. Lett.  28, 2231(2003).  
7. C. Conti, M. Peccianti, and G. Assanto, Opt. Lett.  31, 2030(2006).  
8. C. Rotschild, O. Cohen, O. Manela, M.  Segev, and T. Carmon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
95, 213904 (2005);  
9. C. Rotschild, B. Alfassi, O. Cohen and M. Segev, Nature Physics 2, 769(2006). 
10. F. Ye, Y. V. Kartashov, and L. Torner, Phys. Rev. A  76, 033812(2007). 
11. Z. Xu, Y. V. Kartashov, and L. Toner, Opt. Lett. 30, 3171(2005). 
12. B. Alfassi, C. Rotschild, O. Manela, M. Segev, and D. N. Christodoulides, Opt. 
Lett. 32, 154 (2007); Q. Shou, Q. Liang, Q. Jian g, Y. Zheng, W. Hu, and Q. Guo, 
Opt. Lett . 34, 3523 (2009). 
13. B. Alfassi, C. Rotschild, O. Manela, M. Segev, and D. N. Christodoulides,   Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 98, 213901(2007). 
14. F. Ye, Y. V. Kartashov, and L. Torner , Phys. Rev. A  77, 043821(2008).   11 15. Y. V. Kartashov, F. Ye, V. A. Vysloukh, and L. Torner , Opt. Lett.  32, 
2260(2007).  
16. Y. V. Kartashov, V. A. Vysloukh, and L. Torner , Opt. Lett. 33, 1774(2008).  
17. Y. Kartahov, V. A. Vysloukh, and L. Torner , Opt. Lett. 34, 283(2009).  
18. F. Ye, Y. V. Kartashov, and L. Torner , Phys. Rev. A 77, 033829(2008).  
19. F. Ye, L. Dong, and B. Hu, Opt. Lett . 34, 584 (2009). 
20. I. Kaminer, C. Rotschild, O. Manela, and M. Segev, Opt. Lett . 32, 3209 (2007). 
21. N. K. Efremidis, Phys. Rev. A  77, 063824(2008). 
22. D. Buccoliero, A. S. Desyatnikov, and W. Krolikowski, and Y. Kivshar, J. Opt. A: 
Pure Appl. Opt.  11, 094014(2009). 
23. D. Buccoliero, and A. S. Desyatnikov, Opt. Express  17, 9608(2009).  
24. A. Alberucci, M. Peccianti, and G. Assanto , Opt. Lett. 32, 2795 (2007). 
25. A. Alberucci, G. Assanto, D. Buccoliero, A.  S. Desyatnikov, T. R. Marchant, and 
N. F. Smyth, Phys. Rev. A 79, 043816(2009).  12 Figure captions 
FIG. 1. (Color online) (a) Prof ile of a fundamental soliton at 0.5b . Profiles of dipole 
solitons at (b) 0.5b  and (c) 5b, respectively. The thick line stands for the light 
field ( w) while the light line sta nds for refractive index ( n). (d) the energy flow 
versus propagation constant diagram for f undamental(dashed line), dipole(light line) 
and tripole(thick line) solutions. The two points marked by circle s corresponds to the 
soliton solutions in (b) and (c ) respectively. In all plots 60L . All quantities are 
plotted in arbitrary dimensi onless units.         
FIG. 2. (Color online) (a) Profile of a tripole soliton at 1band 40L . (b) 
Instability growth rate for tripole soli tons versus propaga tion constant at 
20,  30 L and40 . (c) Critical value of propagatio n constant (above which solitons 
are stable) for tripole solitons  versus sample width. (d) Profile of a quadrupole soliton 
at 1band 40L . (e) Instability growth rate for quadrupole solitons versus 
propagation constant at 20,  40 L and60. (f) Critical value of propagation constant 
for quadrupole solitons versus sample width.  All quantities are plotted in arbitrary 
dimensionless units.   
FIG. 3 (a) Profile of a fifth-order soliton at 1b. (b) Instability growth rate for the 
fifth-order soliton. 60L . All quantities are pl otted in arbitrary dimensionless units.   
FIG. 4.  (Color online) Propagation of a perturbed dipole soliton (a) and a fifth-order 
mode (b) in a sample with 60L .  Propagation of a pertur bed quadrupole mode at 
(c) 20L  and (d) 40L . For all the plots, 1b. All quantities are plotted in 
arbitrary dimensionless units.    13 
 
FIG. 1. (Color online) (a) Prof ile of a fundamental soliton at 0.5b . Profiles of dipole 
solitons at (b) 5b and (c) 0.5b , respectively. The thick line stands for the 
light field ( w) while the light line stands for refractive index ( n). (d) Energy 
flow versus propagation constant diagra m for fundamental (dashed line), dipole 
(light line) and tripole(thick line) solutions. The two points marked by circles corresponds to the soliton solutions in (b ) and (c) respectively. In all plots 
60L . All quantities are plotted in arbitrary dimensionless units.            14           
 
FIG. 2. (Color online) (a) Profile of a tripole soliton at 1band 40L . (b) 
Instability growth rate for tripole soli tons versus propaga tion constant at 
20,  30 L and40 . (c) Critical value of propagatio n constant (above which solitons 
are stable) for tripole solitons  versus sample width. (d) Profile of a quadrupole soliton 
at 1band 40L . (e) Instability growth rate for quadrupole solitons versus 
propagation constant at 20,  40 L and60. (f) Critical value of propagation constant 
for quadrupole solitons versus sample width.  All quantities are plotted in arbitrary 
dimensionless units.   15                  
  
FIG. 3 (a) Profile of a fifth-order soliton at 1b. (b) Instability growth rate for the 
fifth-order soliton. 60L . All quantities are plotted in arbitrary dimensionless units.   16  
  
FIG. 4.  (Color online) Propagation of a perturbed dipole soliton (a) and a fifth-order 
mode (b) in a sample with 60L .  Propagation of a pertur bed quadrupole mode at 
(c) 20L  and (d) 40L . For all the plots, 1b. All quantities are plotted in 
arbitrary dimensionless units.   
 