Discovering Knowledge from Multi-modal Lecture Recordings
Rajkumar. K 1, Christian Gütl 2,3, 1 Department of Computer Science, Bishop Heber College, Tiruchirappalli 620017, India2 Institute for Information Systems and Computer Media (IICM), TU-Graz, Austria3 Infodelio Information Systems and GÜTL IT Research & Consulting, Austria1 rajkumarkannan@{yahoo.co.in, demfoundation.org}, 2 cguetl@iicm.edu
Abstract
Educational media mining is the process of converting  
raw  media  data  from  educational  systems  to  useful  
information  that  can  be  used  to  design  learning  
systems,  answer  research  questions  and  allow  
personalized  learning  experiences.  Knowledge  
discovery  encompasses  a  wide  range  of  techniques  
ranging  from  database  queries  to  more  recent  
developments  in  machine  learning  and  language  
technology. Educational media mining techniques are  
now  being  used in  IT Services  research  worldwide.  
Multi-modal  Lecture  Recordings  is  one  of  the  
important types of educational media and this paper  
explores  the  research  challenges  for  mining  lecture  
recordings  for  the  efficient  personalized  learning  
experiences.
Keywords:  Educational  Media  Mining;  Lecture  
Recordings,  Multimodal  Information  System,  
Personalized  Learning;  Online  Course  Ware;  Skills  
and Competences;
1. Introduction
The  rapid  evolution  of  communication  technologies,  
advanced  data  networks  and  the semi-automation of  
multimedia  information  processing  have  greatly  
impacted  learning  experiences.  Multimedia  resources  
include not only entertainment media such as movie,  
cartoon, advertisement, computer games and so on, but  
also  educational  media  such  as  available  in  digital  
library,  museum, digital archives, e-learning systems  
etc. Lecture recording, like courses and presentations,  
is  one  of  the  important  educational  media  types.  
Further information of multi-media resources and their  
application  in  e-Learning  can  be  found  in  literature  
such as [6].
Within  the  last  years  universities  have  increasingly  
started  to record  lectures  and  offer  these  recordings  
students  for  their  learning  procedures.  Some  
universities offer even complete series of recordings of  
hundreds of courses available for public access such as  
MIT OCW [8] and Berkeley courses on YouTube [2]. 
Most  of  the  aforementioned  lecture  recordings  are  
indeed multi-modal in nature.  Most of them include  
audio and video stream(s) as well as an information  
channel  for  synchronized  presentation  slides.  Additionally, information about the interaction with the  
presenter PC (e.g. next slide, mouse movements and  
like) and interaction with other media can add further  
useful information. Moreover, the linkage with lecture  
notes, course outline and background information are  
further  information  which  should  be  taken  into  
account. Also teacher-student interaction and student  
inputs  are  sources  of  information  to  be  kept  and  
analyzed.  Further  information  about  multimodal  
information systems can be found for example in [4].
Such media recordings provide a wide range of useful  
information acquisition within the learning process (see  
for example [9]) but also for analyzing purposes (see  
for example [1]). Therefore Educational Media Mining  
is a vital area of research because it facilitates
•Detecting affect and disengagement
•Detecting  attempts  to  circumvent  learning  
called "gaming the system" 
•Guiding student learning efforts 
•Developing or refining student models 
•Measuring  the  effect  of  individual  
interventions 
•Improving teaching support 
•Predicting student performance and behavior 
However, we need to develop standard data formats  
and ontology, so that researchers can more easily share  
data and conduct meta-analysis across systems, and use  
pre-existing systems for storing, managing, accessing,  
searching and visualizing media recordings and linked  
metadata.  Furthermore,  we need  to determine  which  
data mining techniques are  most appropriate  for  the  
specific  features  of  educational  data, and how these  
techniques can be used on a large scale.
In this paper, we explore the foremost challenges for  
educational  media  mining  in  particular  lecture  
recordings  for  the  efficient  personalized  learning  
experiences.
2. Challenges for Mining Lecture Recordings
Recently, there is a growing interest in capturing the  
live lecture presentations for subsequent distribution to  
students  at  distant  locations,  besides  organizing  the  
course content as a collection of web pages [5] [7].  
Hence,  incorporating  knowledge  and  discovery  in  distance learning environments becomes important and  
unavoidable. Therefore, the foremost challenges for the  
mining of lecture recordings are to enable the effective
•Creation
•Integration
•Exploration
•Analysis
•Presentation  of  knowledge  from  web  based  
content,  so  that  the  users  can  enjoy  the  
facilities. 
For this, we need an intelligent system that will capable  
of  organizing  lecture  recordings  automatically  into  
technically  exploitable  knowledge  source  and  
providing users with information access environment  
to utilize the multimedia content.
3.  Phases  in  Mining  Multi-modal  Lecture  
Recordings
Personalized learning is a demanding requirement for  
any learning systems, see for example [5] and [3]. For  
a learner, it customizes the learning material based on  
their  learning  preferences  in  the  context  of  culture,  
content  and  so  on.  For  an  efficient  personalized  
learning experience, one should know:
•What sort of information should be extracted  
from lecture media.
•What  knowledge  can  be  derived  from  this  
information.
•How to put the information into a form that is  
suitable for students’ learning experience.
By focusing to lecture recordings, students want either  
to  view  lectures  they  have  missed,  view  again  
problematic parts or to retrieve just segments which are  
in the context the current learning task. Therefore, a  
modern system must be able deal with these different  
situations.
The  above  requirements  lead  us  into  the  different  
phases of the mining process. The mining process can  
be broadly categorized as shown below:
•Annotation
•Knowledge discovery
•E-learning environment
•Knowledge repository
Annotation
Instructional repositories archive enormous amount of  
multimedia data as lecture recordings with the support  
of advanced digital technology. Since lecture media is  
highly  unstructured,  an  efficient  access  cannot  be  
possible without the proper indexing scheme. Lack of  
such  indexing  scheme  results  inefficient  search  and  
browse  of  the  lecture  notes  and  recordings.  Since  
manual indexing is tedious, automatic indexing scheme  is  highly  important.  Techniques  for  transforming  
lecture  recordings  into  meaningful  structured  
information can be done by
•Classifying  lecture  video  content  
automatically
•Recognizing key events in the delivery of the  
lecture
•Summarization.
Knowledge Discovery
Educational media mining is fundamentally different  
from  other  general  data  mining  methods.  It  should  
integrate the existing data mining technologies with the  
educational theories to improve the performance of our  
intelligent system. During educational media mining,  
one  should  consider  the  following  questions,  which  
will guide the discovery process. They are,
•What techniques are especially useful for data  
mining 
•How can data mining improve trainer support
•How can data mining build better student  
models
•How can data mining dynamically alter  
instruction more effectively for personalized  
learning 
E-learning Environment
The intelligent system should possess a good learning  
environment  for  personalized  content  learning  upon  
request.   It  should  have  state-of-the-art  human-
computer  interaction  methods  and  visualization  
techniques  to  interface  with  the  system.  The  user  
interface can contain a PC in intranet or internet set up.  
It can also integrate mobile devices such as touch pad,  
audio  and  visual  display.  Besides,  hardware  based  
dedicated  chip with the necessary  sensors and  other  
devices  would  be  noteworthy  environment  for  the  
intelligent system. 
Knowledge Repositories
In order to make use of the discovered structures from  
the  media  recordings,  the  management  of  these  
structures  is  an  essential  technological  goal.  The  
management includes addition, editing and deleting of  
ontological  elements  and  relations  between  those  
elements.
3. ConclusionEducational media mining is emerged as a new way of  
discovering facts from the diverse educational media  
objects more recently. In this paper, particular attention  
has  been  paid  to  lecture  recordings  and  their  
application  for  learning  purposes.  Based  on  that,  
challenges  and  the  different  phases  in  the  mining  
process have been discusses. Currently, we have started  
to build on a prototype dealing with lecture recordings.
References
[1] Anderson, R.J., Anderson, R., Vandegrift, T.,  
Wolfman, S., Yasuhara, K., Designing for Change in  
Networked Learning Environments, Proceedings of the  
International Conference on Computer Support for  
Collaborative Learning 2003, Series: Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning Series , Vol. 2,  
Wasson, B.; Ludvigsen, Sten; Hoppe, Ulrich (Eds.),  
2003, 119-123
[2] Berkeley, Campus launches YouTube channel,  
Universtiy Berkely Press release, last edited Oct. 3rd, 
2007, last retrieved Jan. 20th, 2008 from 
http://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2007/10/
03_YouTube.shtml
[3] Gütl, C., Moving Towards a Generic, Service-based  
Architecture for Flexible Teaching and Learning  
Activities. In C. Pahl (Ed.) Architecture Solutions for  
E-Learning Systems (peer-reviewed), Peer-reviewed  
book chapter, Idea Group Inc., Hershey, USA, Nov.  
2007.[4] Gütl, C., Automatic Extraction, Indexing, Retrieval  
and Visualization of Multimodal Meeting Recordings  
for Knowledge Management Activities, in M.  
Granitzer, M. Lux, and M. Spaniol (Eds.) Multimedia  
Semantics – The Role of Metadata (peer reviewed),  
Springer, 2008 (not yet published. available: April 3,  
2008)
[5] Fiehn, T., Lauer, T., Lienhard, J., Ottmann, T.,  
Trahasch, S., Zupancic, B., From Lecture Recordings  
towards Personalized Collaborative Learning,  
Proceedings of CSCL 2003.
[6] Huang, W., Eze, E., Webster, D.,  Towards  
integrating semantics of multi-media resources and  
processes in e-Learning, Multimedia Systems, Springer  
Berlin / Heidelberg, Vo. 11, No. 3, März 2006, 203-
215.
[7] Lampi, F., Kopf, S., Benz, M., Effelsberg, W., An 
automatic cameraman in a lecture recording system,  
Proceedings of the international workshop on  
Educational multimedia and multimedia education,  
2007, 11 - 18
[8] MIT OCW, About OCW, MIT OpenCourseWare  
site, last retrieved Jan. 20th, 2008 from 
http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/web/about/about/index.ht
m
[9] Zupancic, B., Horz, H., Lecture recording and its  
use in a traditional university course, ACM SIGCSE  
Bulletin  archive, Vo. 34 , Issue 3, September 2002, 24  
– 28.