arXiv:1001.0843v1  [astro-ph.SR]  6 Jan 2010Comm. in Asteroseismology
Contribution to the Proceedings of the 38thLIAC/HELAS-ESTA/BAG, 2008
Overshooting
B. Dintrans
LATT, Universit´ e de Toulouse, CNRS, 14 av. Edouard Belin, 3 1400 Toulouse, France
Abstract
Overshooting occurs in stars when convective elements pene trate into adjacent
radiative zones. In the Sun, it leads to the so-called ‘tachocl ine’ at the base
of the outer convection zone and this region is becoming a key ingredient of
the standard solar dynamo model as strong toroidal magnetic ﬁelds may be
generated there. However this overshoot is not predicted by the mixing-length
theory of convection where convective elements must stop at the border of a
convectively unstable region. I will review the main proper ties of this convective
overshoot in stellar interiors, with in particular its subt le dependence with the
thermal diﬀusion, and will present the most recent results o btained from 2-D
and 3-D direct numerical simulations (DNS) of penetrative c onvection.
Session: Physics and uncertainties in massive stars on the M S and close to it
Introduction
In the standard model of thermal convection based on the mixin g-length phe-
nomenology (B¨ ohm-Vitense 1958), the penetration of conve ctive elements into
surrounding stable layers is not possible. Indeed, the mixin g-length velocity v
of a convective blob is related to its temperature contrast δTby
v2∝δT
TgℓwithδT∝ ∇−∇ ad, (1)
wheregandℓdenote the gravity and the mixing length, respectively, and ∇
and∇adthe usual temperature ‘nabla’. Following Schwarzschild’s cri terion,
the interface that separates a convective zone from a radiat ive one corresponds
to∇=∇adtherefore the blob must stop here. However, the mixing-leng th
formalism is based on an acceleration budget and setting the blob acceleration
to zero does not mean that its velocity is itself zero, i.e., the mixing-length2 Overshooting
theory neglects inertia. In fact, the blob penetrates into the stable layer over a
small distance, then it is sloweddown bythe buoyancybrakin gand ﬁnallystops.
This small penetration is not anecdotal because it has impor tant consequences
in stellar physics:
- it leads to diﬀerent evolutionary tracks in the HR diagram a s massive stars
live longer on the main sequence due to the additional mixing induced by the
overshootingabovetheconvectivecore(Rosvick&Vandenbe rg1998,Perryman
et al. 1998).
- in the standard α−Ωmodel of the solar dynamo, the regeneration of poloidal
magnetic ﬁelds into toroidal ones takes place in the tachocl ine where vertical
and latitudinal diﬀerential rotation is expected to be most eﬃcient (Parker
1955, Brandenburg & Subramanian 2005).
- heliosismology showed that the solar core rotation is almo st rigid (Brown et
al. 1989). Internal gravity waves propagating in stellar rad iative zones are
suspected to play the main role in this angular momentum redi stribution (Zahn
et al. 1997, Talon & Charbonnel 2003). The most wide-spread e xcitation
model involves penetrative convection from neighboring co nvection zones as
strong downdrafts extend a substantial distance into the ad jacent stable zones
sothatinternalgravitywavescanberandomlygenerated(Di ntransetal. 2005).
Modelling of overshooting
Assuming that the temperature gradient in the overshoot lay er is close to the
adiabatic one of the next convection zone, Roxburgh (1978) i nvestigated the
overshoot of convective cores and derived what it is now call ed the ‘Roxburgh’s
integral constraint’:
/integraldisplayrc
0(L−Lrad)d/parenleftbigg1
T/parenrightbigg
>0, (2)
where the radius rccorresponds to the edge of the overshoot region, while L
andLraddenote the total and radiative luminosity, respectively. T he overshoot
layer corresponds in this relation to the region where L < L rad(i.e., negative
contribution) while the convection zone means L > L rad(i.e., positive contri-
bution). However, this relation gives an upper limit of the o vershoot extent
because it does not take into account the dissipation acting on the penetrating
elements. Indeed, the viscous dissipation Dνenters in the heat equation and
aﬀects the blob dynamics such that the correct relation read s now (Roxburgh
1989):
/integraldisplayrc
0(L−Lrad)d/parenleftbigg1
T/parenrightbigg
=/integraldisplayrc
04πr2Dν
TdrwithDν∼ν/parenleftbigg∂ui
∂xj/parenrightbigg2
,(3)B. Dintrans 3
whereνdenotes the kinematic viscosity. As the viscous dissipatio n is always
positive, this term acts to decrease the negative part of the integrand in the
left-hand side and thus the radius rc.
Following Roxburgh’s investigation, Zahn (1991) showed tha t the penetra-
tion extent also depends on the value of the Peclet number Peassociated with
the convective elements, that is,
Pe=vℓ
χ, (4)
whereχdenotes the thermal diﬀusivity. Small Peclet’s numbers mean that
the radiative diﬀusion is stronger than the advection and th e convective blob
rapidly loses its identity compared to the surrounding medi um. As a conse-
quence, it does not feel any more the buoyancy braking and tra vels over long
distances in the radiative zone (Zahn called this regime ‘ove rshoot’). On the
other hand, a blob with a large Peclet number does not thermal ize rapidly with
its surrounding (i.e., no radiative losses)and keepits ident ity: it is then strongly
slowed down by the buoyant force and its penetration is weake r (the so-called
‘penetration’ regime). Penetrationleads to an adiabatic st ratiﬁcationbelow the
convection zone because of the induced entropy mixing, wher eas overshoot has
no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the local stratiﬁcation.
Assuming that the velocity Wof the penetrating motions obeys the usual
mixing-length scaling of thermal convection, Zahn derived the following rela-
tions for both the subadiabatic extent of a convective regio n and the width of
the thermal boundary layer:
Lp∝f1/2W3/2andLbound∝/parenleftbiggχHp
g/parenrightbigg1/2
, (5)
wherefdenotes a ﬁlling factor of convective plumes (i.e., fraction o f the area
occupied by the plumes) and Hpthe pressure scale-height at the bottom of
the convection zone. Applied to the Sun, these two scalings l ead to a pene-
tration extent of about 0.2−0.3Hp(∼15 000km) and an overshoot layer
≃1km. These scalings seem however to overestimate the amount o f con-
vective penetration inferred by helioseismology as the stu dy of the oscillations
in the asymptotic laws of solar acoustic modes rather predic ts an upper limit
of∼0.1Hpfor the extent of the whole convective overshooting (Roxbur gh &
Vorontsov 1994; Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. 1995; see als o Aerts et al. 2003
for the case of a massive star).4 Overshooting
Numerical simulations of overshooting
The bad news
The rapid development of supercomputers has lead several gr oups to under-
take direct numerical simulations of convective overshoot ing. However, many
numerical diﬃculties appear when one tries to simulate stel lar convection:
- the molecular viscosity in stellar interiors is small, typ icallyν∼1cm2/s
(Parker 1979). Granulation cells in the upper convection zo ne of the Sun
correspond to a typical size and velocity of about L= 1000km andU= 1
km/s, respectively. It leads to Reynolds’ number of about Re=UL/ν∼1011,
meaning that solar convection is a highly turbulent and nonl inear phenomenon.
- we know from Kolmogorov’s theory of turbulence (Kolmogorov 1941) that
the ratio between the largest scale (i.e., the injection scale L) and the smallest
one (i.e., the dissipation scale ℓd) behaves as L/ℓd∼Re3/4such that the
solar dissipation scale is about one centimeter. In other wor ds, one needs
(at least) 108gridpoints in each spatial direction to well reproduce both the
injection of energy in the largest structures and its viscou s dissipation in the
smallest ones (the turbulent cascade scenario). As this num ber of gridpoints is
clearly beyond the scope oftoday supercomputers, several n umerical techniques
have been developed to overcome this restriction: (i) inste ad of doing Direct
Numerical Simulations (DNS), one can perform Large-Eddy Si mulations (LES)
where the small-scale dynamics is modelled using a sub-grid scale approach
(Lesieur 2008); (ii) one can also artiﬁcially increase the d issipation scale by
adding a large-scale viscosity in the whole computational d omain, the price to
pay being that motions are essentially laminar ( Re∼102···104).
- ﬁnally, another problem concerns the diﬀerent time scales that coexist in a
convection zone. Indeed, the local turnover time scale of con vection is roughly
given by:
τ∼Hp/URMS, (6)
whereURMSis the typical (turbulent) RMS velocity of convective eddie s. Ap-
plied to the solar convection zone, it leads to turnover time scales of about the
day at the surface to several months at the bottom (Spruit 197 4). As a con-
sequence, simulations should reproduce motions whose dyna mical time scales
can vary by two orders of magnitude in the computational doma in. Moreover,
the thermal time scale is also much more longerthan these tur nover time scales
by orders of magnitude as, e.g., the solar thermal ﬂux expresse d in dynamical
units is very small at the bottom of the convection zone ( F⊙/(ρc3
s)∼10−11).
This ratio is in essence equal to the ratio of the dynamical to thermal time
scales, meaning that realistic simulations should be integ rated on a very longB. Dintrans 5
Figure 1: Penetration extent ∆v.s. stability parameter S.Left: in the 2-D case
where both the penetration and overshoot regimes exist (fro m Hurlburt et al. 1994).
Right: in the 3-D case where only the overshoot regime remains (fro m Brummell et
al. 2002).
time to make sure that a thermal-relaxed state is reached. It i s not possible in
practice to do that with a decent spatial resolution and the t hermal ﬂuxes are
commonly overestimated by orders of magnitude in numerical simulations.
DNS of convective overshooting in local cartesian boxes
FollowingHurlburt et al. (1984), the majorityofDNS doneso faruse polytropic
solutions for the internal structure of the star. Indeed, pol ytropes with ρ∝
Tm(mbeing the polytropic index) allow to easily specify the stre ngth of the
convective instability as the hydrostatic equilibrium imp lies in that case
dT
dz=−g
(m+1)R∗, (7)
wheregis the downward-directed gravity, zthe altitude and R∗the perfect gas
constant. For a monatomic gas with an adiabatic index γ= 5/3, this relation
shows that the temperature gradient is equal to the adiabati c one(=−g/cp)
when the polytropic index is mad= 1/(γ−1) = 3/2. As a consequence,
a stable layer corresponds to m > m adand a convectively-unstable one to
m < m ad.
Hurlburt et al. (1986, 1994) used this model to study the over shooting in
2-D simulations of compressible convection for a solar case , that is, a radiative
zone with polytropic index m3>3/2located above a convective zone with
polytropic index m2<3/2. In particular, they studied the inﬂuence of the6 Overshooting
relative stabilityparameter Son the penetration extent ∆, whereS=−(mad−
m3)/(mad−m2), and found the following scalings (Fig. 1, left):


∆∝S−1for small S-values: penetration regime ,
∆∝S−1/4for large S-values: overshoot regime.(8)
However, these scaling laws have not been fully conﬁrmed in t he 3-D case by
Brummell et al. (2002) as only the overshoot regime ∆∝S−1/4is recovered
(Fig.1, right). The reason simply lies in the smaller ﬁlling f actorffor the con-
vective plumes compared to the 2-D case (Eq. 5): the spaced do wndrafts that
penetrate into the stably stratiﬁed layer are not enough to m aintain an adia-
batic stratiﬁcation below the convection zone and only the t hermal boundary
layer exists.
t=1000.0
Figure 2: Vorticity isocontours in a 2-D star-in-a-box simu lation of penetrative con-
vection for a solar-like star (Dintrans & Brandenburg 2009) .
Another interesting 2-D and 3-D simulations of penetrative convection are
the ones donebyRoxburgh& Simmons(1993)and Singhet al. (19 98). Indeed,
a more realistic model of the star interior has been consider ed in the 2-D case
through a temperature-dependent radiative conductivity. The main result is
that the viscous dissipation contribution in the RHS of Roxb urgh’s integral
constraint (3) decreases with the Prandtl number. It suggest s that in the
astrophysical limit of very small Prandtl numbers ( Pr∼10−6), the stable and
unstable contributions in the LHS of Roxburgh’s integral str ictly balance each
other and are suﬃcient to obtain a good estimate for the overs hoot extentB. Dintrans 7
(Roxburgh & Simmons 1993). In the 3-D case (Singh et al. 1998), a sub-
grid scale modelling of the small scales led to the conﬁrmati on of the scaling
relationships between this extent and both the imposed bott om ﬂux and the
vertical velocity of convective downdrafts (see Eq. 5).
Global DNS
In the last decade, global direct simulations of overshootin g have greatly im-
proved following two numerical approaches:
- the spherical shape of the star is reproduced using a pseudo -spectral code
where physical ﬁelds are projected onto spherical harmonic s. Browning et al.
(2004) used this method with the 3-D anelastic ASH code to stu dy the core
overshooting in a massive A-type star of 2M⊙, where only the inner 30% by
radiusofthestarhasbeenconsidered(convectivecoreands omeofitssurround-
ing radiative envelope). Although the achievement of the th ermal relaxation
in these simulations remains questioning, they found that t he convective core
adopts a prolate shape while overshooting is larger at the eq uator than at the
poles, yielding an overall spherical shape to the whole cent ral region.
- the star is embedded in a topologically Cartesian domain an d the sphericity
is reproduced through radial-dependent forcing or damping proﬁles. This novel
approach has been developed by Dintrans & Brandenburg (2009 ) and ﬁrst
results in 2-D are promising as both the penetration and over shoot regimes are
observed, whereas internal gravity waves are eﬃciently exc ited in the central
radiative zone (Fig. 2).
Conclusion
Convective overshooting is today included in stellar evolu tion codes and evo-
lutionary tracks of massive stars reproduce satisfactoril y the observations of
clusters when an overshooting above convective cores is ass umed. Theoreti-
cal studies showed that the overshoot region is composed of t wo nested layers
whose the size depends on the value of the Peclet number of pen etrating mo-
tions. Numerical studies in 2-D and 3-D of penetrative conve ction conﬁrmed
this picture, except that only the overshoot layer (i.e., the t hermal boundary
one) exists in 3-D due to the weak ﬁlling factor of convective plumes. These
local and global direct numerical simulations are however s till quite far from
realistic values of stellar interiors. Flows are less turbu lent than in reality and
the overshoot regime dominates. Further progress are clear ly needed in the
numerical side of this problem (e.g., development of large-ed dy simulations), in
its theoretical modelling (e.g., turbulent closure models; K upka & Montgomery
2002) and in the observational signatures of overshooting f rom asteroseismol-
ogy.8 Overshooting
References
Aerts, C., Thoul, A., Daszy´ nska, J., et al. 2003, Sci, 300, 1 926
B¨ ohm-Vitense, E. 1958, ZA, 46, 108
Brandenburg, A., & Subramanian, K. 2005, PhR, 417, 1
Brown, T. M., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Dziembowski, W.A ., et al. 1989, SoPh,
343, 526
Browning, M. K., Brun, A. S., & Toomre, J. 2004, ApJ, 601, 512
Brummell, N. H., Clune, T. L., & Toomre, J. 2002, ApJ, 570, 825
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G., & Thomp son, M. J. 1995,
MNRAS, 276, 283
Dintrans, B., Brandenburg, A., Nordlund, ˚A., et al. 2005, A&A, 438, 365
Dintrans, B., & Brandenburg, A. 2009, ˚A., in preparation
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., & Massaguer, J. M. 1984, ApJ, 282 , 557
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., & Massaguer, J. M. 1986, ApJ, 311 , 563
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., Massaguer, J. M., & Zahn, J.-P. 1 994, ApJ, 421, 245
Kolmogorov, A. N. 1941, DoSSR, 30, 301
Kupka, F., & Montgomery, M. H. 2002, MNRAS, 330, L6
Lesieur, M. 2008, Turbulence in Fluids (Springer-Verlag)
Parker, E. N. 1955, ApJ, 122, 293
Parker, E. N., 1979, Cosmical Magnetic Fields, (Oxford Univ ersity Press)
Perryman, M. A. C., Brown, A. G. A., Lebreton, Y., et al. 1998, A&A, 331, 81
Rosvick, J. M., & Vandenberg, D. A. 1998, AJ, 115, 1516
Roxburgh, I. W. 1978, A&A, 65, 281
Roxburgh, I. W. 1989, A&A, 211, 361
Roxburgh, I. W. & Simmons, J. 1993, A&A, 277, 93
Roxburgh, I. W., & Vorontsov, S. V. 1994, MNRAS, 268, 880
Singh, H. P., Roxburgh, I. W., & Chan, K. L. 1998, A&A, 340, 178
Spruit, H. C. 1974, SoPh, 34, 277
Talon, S., & Charbonnel, C. 2003, A&A, 405, 1025
Zahn, J.-P. 1991, A&A, 252, 179
Zahn, J.-P., Talon, S., & Matias, J. 1997, A&A, 322, 320