arXiv:1001.0140v1  [physics.ins-det]  31 Dec 20091
ThermalControl ofaDualMode
Parametric SapphireTransducer
JacopoBelﬁ,Nicol `oBeverini,AndreaDe Michele,GianlucaGabbriellini,
FrancescoMangoandRobertoPassaquieti
Abstract—We propose a method to control the thermal stability of a sap phire dielectric transducer made with two
dielectricdisksseparatedbyathingapandresonatinginth ewhisperinggallery(WG)modesoftheelectromagneticﬁeld .
The simultaneousmeasurementof the frequenciesof botha WG H mode and a WGE mode allowsone to discriminate
the frequency shifts due to gap variations from those due to t emperature instability. A simple model, valid in quasi
equilibriumconditions,describesthe frequencyshift of t he two modes in terms of four tuningparameters.A procedure
forthedirectmeasurementof themispresented.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
ADIELECTRIC whispering gallery resonator,
made with two dielectric disks separated
by a thin gap is a very sensitive displacement
sensor [1]. Indeed, parametric microwave sap-
phire oscillators, operating at cryogenic tem-
perature, have been proposed as readout sys-
tems for bar-type gravitational antennae [2]
and also as core sensors for space-gravity tests
and geodesy research [3]. It has been shown
that such devices provide high sensitive vi-
bration measurements even when operating at
room-temperature [4].
The efﬁciency of these transducers is conve-
niently described by the merit factor
M=Q·∂zf
f,
whereQis the resonator quality factor, fits res-
onance frequency and ∂zfis the tuning coefﬁ-
cient, the derivative of the resonance frequency
w.r.t. the gap spacing z.
The modes are classiﬁed as WGH modes
(characterized by Ez,Hφ,Hρ)andWGE modes
(withHz,Eφ,Eρ), wherezdenotes the compo-
nent of the ﬁeld vector along the disks rota-
•The authors are with the Department of Physics “Enrico Fermi ”
and CNISM unit` a di Pisa , Universit` a di Pisa, 56127 Pisa, It aly.
E-mail: belﬁ@df.unipi.ittional axis, ρthe radial component, and φthe
azimuthal one.
TheWGH modes with high azimuthal mode
number present the highest merit factors [2].
Even at room temperature, X-band reso-
nances in a sapphire resonator made with disks
4 cm in diameter and 0.5 cm in thickness, ex-
hibit aQfactor of ∼105and a tuning coefﬁcient
of6 MHzµm−1so that M∼60µm−1. The
frequency instability is dominated by thermal
effects, which contribute with some tenths of
MHz K−1. This strong temperature dependence
of the dielectric tensor compromises the long
term stability. On the other side, ultra-low
frequency (i.e. diurnal timescale) displacement
measurements have a key role in many appli-
cations such as gravimetric exploration, envi-
ronmental monitoring and materials testing.
In the research ﬁeld of ultra stable oscillators,
several techniques for precision temperature
stabilization have been proposed. At low tem-
perature (below 100 K) the cancellation (to ﬁrst
order) of the temperature coefﬁcient of fre-
quency can be achieved by employing doped
dielectric disks [5], composite sapphire-rutile
resonators [6] and mechanically compensated
structures [7]. High thermal stability at room
temperature can be obtained with high pre-
cision control stages, by the optimization of
temperature sensors [8] and actuators [9], and
also by accurately modelling and simulating2
the thermodynamic system under test [10].
Due to the anisotropy of the sapphire crystal,
the temperature coefﬁcient of frequency is in
general different for WGH and WGE modes.
Exciting two electromagnetic modes with dif-
ferent polarization in the same resonator per-
mit one to measure and stabilize the resonator
temperature in oscillators [11], [12] even at
room temperature [13]. In the case of a dis-
placement transducer, WGH and WGE modes
have to satisfy different boundary conditions at
the gap spacing thus exhibiting also different
tuning coefﬁcients ∂zf.
The measured resonance frequency varia-
tions in a parametric sapphire transducer are
given by the mixing of pure-displacement sig-
nals, pure-temperature signals and temperature-
induced displacement signals. These last are due
to the thermal expansion of the material com-
prising the enclosing chamber.
In this paper we propose a calibration tech-
nique providing an estimate of pure displace-
ment signals in a dual mode parametric sap-
phire resonator transducer operating at room
temperature.
Fig. 1. A generic displacement sensor based
on a transducer converting the physical quan-
tity “x”, in a vertical displacement δlx. A servo
actuator controls the separation set point. The
sapphire disks are cut with their c-axis parallel
tothecylinder axis.
2 THERMAL EFFECTS IN A SAPPHIRE
PARAMETRIC TRANSDUCER
The frequency dependence on temperature
for the parametric displacement transducer ofFig. 1 is described by the following equa-
tion [12]:
1
f∂f
∂T=−pǫ⊥αǫ⊥−pǫ||αǫ|| (1)
−pDαD−phαh−pz(2αls+αl2+αlx−αl1),
whereαθ=1
θ∂θ
∂Tare coefﬁcients depending on
the materials and pθ=θ
f∂f
∂θare the ﬁlling factors
of the considered WG mode and depend on
the ﬁeld distribution of the mode inside the
resonating volume. The label θrefers respec-
tively to: ǫ⊥andǫ||the dielectric constants per-
pendicular and parallel to the c-axis, Dandh
the resonator spatial dimensions perpendicular
and parallel to the c-axis, ls,l1,l2,lx,zthe verti-
cal dimensions of the single sapphire disk, the
chamber length, the lower support (actuator),
the upper support (moving part) and the gap
spacing. Under stationary conditions, one can
assume to be valid the following linear and
time-independent relation between a given pair
of WG modes, the temperature Tand the gap
spacingz:
/parenleftBigg
δfWGH
δfWGE/parenrightBigg
=C/parenleftBigg
δT
δz/parenrightBigg
(2)
with
C=/parenleftBigg
CWGH
TCWGH
z
CWGE
TCWGE
z/parenrightBigg
. (3)
The anisotropy of both the material and the
ﬁeld distribution assures that it is possible to
invert Cand to obtain the following estimate
for the effective temperature ﬂuctuations δT∗
and for the pure (not thermally-induced) dis-
placement δz∗:
/parenleftBigg
δT∗
δz∗/parenrightBigg
=C−1/parenleftBigg
δfWGH
δfWGE/parenrightBigg
. (4)
3 CALIBRATION
The basis of the method is to determine the
coefﬁcients of the matrix Cby means of a
calibration procedure. A schematics of the ex-
perimental apparatus for the sensor calibration
is shown in Fig. 2. The sapphire transducer is
placed inside a metallic chamber which is tem-
perature stabilized at about 34◦C. Each cham-
ber wall is electrically isolated in order to avoid3
any inﬂuence from cavity modes on the chosen
WG modes in the dielectric. A 4 cm thick insu-
lation material covers the whole chamber to re-
duce the heat losses. The temperature stabiliza-
tion system consists of a standard PI controller
driving a set of thermoresistances in thermal
contact with the metallic cavity. The set point
temperature is determined by a voltage input
for calibration purposes. The sapphire disks
composing the resonator transducer are cou-
pled to four microwaves antennae (see Fig. 2).
Two electric probes, coupled to the azimuthal
electric ﬁeld are used for sustaining the WGE
oscillations. One electric probe, coupled to the
axial electric ﬁeld, and one magnetic probe,
coupled to the azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld, excite
the WGH oscillations. We chose to test the
system using the following modes (see Fig. 3):
fWGE11,1,1∼11.38 GHz, (5)
fWGH 10,1,1∼11.20 GHz,
forz∼300µm. In this choice there is very little
coupling [1] between the selected modes and
furthermore they are close enough in frequency
so that it is possible to measure their beat
note by means of an RF frequency counter.
The upper resonator disk is rigidly attached to
the aluminium top plate and the lower disk is
mounted on a piezoelectric actuator.
A PC based data acquisition system moni-
tors three physical quantities: internal temper-
ature (via the resistance of a Pt100 temperature
probe), the WGE mode frequency (with a mi-
crowave frequency counter) and the WGE−
WGH beat frequency (with an RF frequency
counter).
4 CHECK OF THE METHOD
Once the two microwave oscillations are imple-
mented, we can evaluate the four elements of
theCmatrix by means of the temperature and
position controllers. CWGE
z andCWGH
z are given
by the ratio between the frequency variation
offWGEandfWGHand the calibrated gap
variation induced by the piezoelectric actuator
moving the lower disk.
CWGE
T andCWGH
T are instead the proportion-
ality constants between the frequency varia-
tion extrapolated at thermal equilibrium and
Fig. 2. Microwave circuitry for the dual mode
self oscillating transducer employed for the
calibration. TC: Temperature Controller, PS:
Phase Shifter, MA: Microwave Ampliﬁer (ALC-
ALN060029),Circ:Circulator,PD:PowerDetec-
tor.
Fig. 3. Resonance frequencies of WGH and
WGEmodes versus gap spacing.4
the temperature variation induced by thermal
actuators. For the present setup we obtained:
CWGE
T= 0.155MHz/K,
CWGH
T= 3.64MHz/K,
CWGE
z= 0.567MHz/µm,
CWGH
z= 3.43MHz/µm.
In Fig. 4 we show a comparison between
the frequency-based temperature variation es-
timateδT∗and the temperature variation mea-
sured by a Pt100 thermometer placed inside the
chamber. The measurement is referred to stabi-
lized temperature conditions and rigid materi-
als. The agreement between the two traces con-
ﬁrms the validity of the model especially for
very slow variations and makes it possible to
measure the sensor temperature sensitivity by
means of frequency measurements. In Fig. 5 we
show a comparison between the displacement
estimate δz∗, obtained from the calibrated dual
frequency measurement, and δfWGH/CWGH
z i.e.
the displacement estimate one would get from
theWGH mode alone (the most sensitive mode
to the gap spacing variation). It is neatly visible
that the trace δz∗displays a net reduction of the
ﬂuctuations over time scales typical of thermal
phenomena.
It is worth remarking that the assumption of
thermal equilibrium for the system is essential
to effectively ﬁlter out the temperature noise
from the displacement signal. In Fig. 6 we show
the Allan deviation sz(τ) =/radicalBig
/angbracketleft(¯zi−¯zi+1)2/angbracketright/2
(where¯ziis the average of the displacement
zover the i–th sample–period of duration τ) of
the two displacement traces of Fig. 5.
It can be seen that for integration times be-
low about 200 sec the dual mode based dis-
placement measurements are noisier than the
single frequency measurements. This is due to
the fact that over these time scales the dif-
ferent sensor components are not in thermal
equilibrium and the two frequencies are al-
most uncorrelated. For integration times above
about 500 sec, a net reduction of noise can be
observed for the trace due to δz∗. This time
scale corresponds to the longest time constant
(sapphire thermalization) in the sensor. Here
thermal equilibrium approximation is almost
Fig. 4. Comparison between frequency-based
temperature estimate and temperature mea-
sured by aPt100 probe.
Fig.5. Comparisonbetweenthedualfrequency
based displacement estimate and the estimate
obtained from thesingle WGHmode.
valid and then the method provides the ex-
pected noise cancellation.
5 CONCLUSIONS
We proposed and tested an experimental tech-
nique for reducing the instabilities induced by
thermal ﬂuctuations in a sapphire parametric
displacement transducer. The effective temper-
ature of the sensor and the pure displace-
ment signal can be obtained from a double
frequency measurement. The very simple time-
independent model of the system has been5
Fig. 6. Allan deviation of the displacement
ﬂuctuations showninFig. 5.
tested on a trial setup in order to outline the
potential and the limitations of the method. In
the future we intend to improve the efﬁciency
of the thermal stabilization and isolation of the
system in order to improve the bandwidth of
the noise ﬁltering. Finally by implementing a
double locking of the two reconstructed quan-
tities (δT∗andδz∗) it will be possible to im-
plement the experiment under static conditions
and improve on the modelled assumptions.
REFERENCES
[1] D.G. Blair, E.N. Ivanov and H. Peng “Sapphire dielectric
resonator transducers,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. , vol. 25,
pages 1110-1115, 1992.
[2] D.G. Blair, E.N. Ivanov, M.E. Tobar and B.D. Cuthbert-
son, “Sensitivity and optimization of a high-Q sapphire
dielectric motion-sensing transducer,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason.
Ferroelect. Freq. Contr. , vol. 45, pages 1303-1313, 1998.
[3] L.P . Martin, J.J. Suter and M. Rosen, “Sapphire resonato r
transducer accelerometer for space gravity gradiometry,”
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. , vol. 27, pages 875-880, 1994.
[4] D.G. Blair, E.N. Ivanov and H. Peng, “An ultrahigh sensi-
tivity sapphire transducer for vibration measurements,” J.
Phys. D: Appl. Phys. , vol. 27, pages 1150-1155, 1994.
[5] J. G. Hartnett, M. E. Tobar, A. G. Mann, E. N. Ivanov, J.
Krupka, and R. Geyer, “Frequency-temperature compensa-
tion inTi3+andTi4+doped sapphire whispering gallery
mode resonators,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control , vol. 46 (4), pages 9931000, 1999.
[6] J.G. Hartnett, P .Y. Bourgeois, J.D. Anstie, M.E. Tobar,
N. Bazin, E.N. Ivanov, D. Cros, V . Giordano, Y. Ker-
sale, “High-Q frequency-temperature compensated solid-
nitrogen-cooled resonator-oscillators: ﬁrst results,” Elec-
tronics letters , vol. 40, pages 41-42, 2004.[7] G. J. Dick, D. Santiago and R. T. Wang, “Temperature-
Compensated Sapphire Resonator for Ultra-Stable Oscil-
lator Capability at Temperatures Above 77 K,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 42 (5), 1995.
[8] Y. Kersale, F. Lardet-Vieudrin, M. Chaubet, and V . Gior-
dano, “ Thermal stabilisation of high-Q sapphire mi-
crowave resonator using thermosensitive quartz sensor,”
Electronics letters , vol. 34 (8), pages 783-784, 1998.
[9] M. E. Tobar, A. J. Giles, S. Edwards, and J. H. Searls,
“Low Noise 9-GHz Sapphire Resonator- Oscillator with
Thermoelectric Temperature Stabilization at 300 Kelvin,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control , vol. 5 (4),
pages 108-110, 1995.
[10] R. Boudot, C. Rocher, N. Bazin, S. Galliou, and V . Gior-
dano, “High-precision temperature stabilization for sap-
phire resonators in microwave oscillators,” Rev. Sci. Instr. ,
vol. 76, 095110, 2005.
[11] M. E. Tobar, E. N. Ivanov, C. R. Locke and J. G. Hartnett,
“New method to build a high stability oscillator from
the temperature compensation of the different frequency
between modes of orthogonal polarization,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control , vol. 50, pages 214-219,
2003.
[12] M. E. Tobar, G. L. Hamilton, J. G. Hartnett, E. N. Ivanov,
D. Cros and P . Guillon, “The dual-mode frequency locked
technique for the characterization of the temperature coef -
ﬁcient of permittivity of anisotropic materials,” Meas. Sci.
Technol. , vol. 15, pages 29-34, 2004.
[13] J.A. Torrealba, M.E. Tobar, E.N. Ivanov, C.R. Locke, J- M.
Le Floch, D. Cros, and J.G. Hartnett, “Room Temperature
Dual-Mode Oscillator- First Results,” Electronics letters , vol.
42 (2), pages 99-100, 2006.