arXiv:1001.0888v1  [astro-ph.SR]  6 Jan 2010Mem.S.A.It.Vol., 1
c/circlecopyrtSAIt 2008 Memorie della
Numericalsimulationsofthequietchromosphere
Jorrit Leenaarts1
Astronomical Institute - Utrecht University - PO Box 80000 N L–3508 TA Utrecht,
The Netherlands e-mail: j.leenaarts@uu.nl
Abstract. Numerical simulations of the solar chromosphere have becom e increasingly
realistic over the past 5 years. However, many observed chro mospheric structures and be-
havior are not reproduced. Current models do not show ﬁbrils in CaII 8542 Å, and neither
reproduce the CaII 8542 Å bisector. The emergent H αline core intensity computed from
the models show granulation instead of chromospheric shock s or ﬁbrils. I discuss these
deﬁciencies and speculate about what physics should be incl uded to alleviate these short-
comings.
Key words. Sun: chromosphere, Methods: numerical
1. Introduction
The solar chromosphere is in many ways the
most complicated and most interesting region
ofthesolar atmosphere.
The chromosphere is the interface layer
between the convection zone /photosphere and
the corona where the value of the plasma
β-parameter changes from larger to smaller
than unity. Consequently, its overall charac-
ter changes from a convective overshoot layer
into a regime where the three-dimensional
(3D) magnetic topology determines the struc-
ture. The chromosphereis convectivelystable,
so the dominant input of mechanical energy
comes in the form of waves excited by gran-
ules and the buﬀeting of magnetic concentra-
tions in the photosphere. It also absorbs ra-
diation from both the photosphere ( e.g.,H−,
Balmer-continuum) and the corona (He con-
tinua). Thermal conduction in the corona has
a strong inﬂuence on the shape of the transi-
Send oﬀprint requests to :J. Leenaartstion region, and hence of the upper chromo-
sphere. The dominant chromospheric energy
loss is through radiation in strong lines. Thus,
a comprehensive model of the chromosphere
cannot be made without modeling the under-
lying photosphere and upper convection zone
andtheoverlyinglowercorona.
The wide range of pertinent physical pro-
cesses require that a comprehensive descrip-
tion of the chromosphereneeds to incorporate
acarefulcombinationofatomicandmolecular
physics, radiative transfer, MHD and plasma
physics.Thiscomplicatedphysicsrequiresnu-
mericalmodeling.
From the above discussion I conclude that
a “minimallysatisfyingself-consistentmodel”
ofthechromosphereshould
–betime-dependent;
–bethree-dimensional;
–modelradiativeheatingandcooling;
–have a lower boundary in the convection
zone,with a boundaryconditionthat feeds
enoughenergyintothesimulationtomain-2 Leenaarts: Simulations ofthe quiet chromosphere
tain a the radiative energy loss at the solar
eﬀectivetemperature;
–have an upper boundary in the corona. If
the model cannot self-consistently main-
tain a corona, it must provide enough en-
ergyﬂuxtokeepplasmaneartheboundary
at coronaltemperatures.
Within these constraints one can add features
and physics to the model to increase its real-
ism, while at the same time trying to keep the
numberoffreeparametersto aminimum.
The above list does not imply that mod-
elswithoutthosepropertiesaresomehow“bad
models”. To the contrary, simpler models are
often instrumental in identifying and charac-
terizing relevant physical processes. However,
athoroughunderstandingofthechromosphere
ultimatelyrequiresaself-consistentmodelthat
reproducesall observedchromosphericbehav-
ior.
2. Currentstatus
The current state-of-the-art in self-consistent
chromospheric modeling is the modeling
performed with the radiation-magneto-
hydrodynamics (RMHD) Oslo Stagger
Code (OSC Hansteen 2004) and the MPI-
parallelized Bifrost code currently under
development(Gudiksenet al.2010).
Thesecodesarebasedonthemethodspio-
neered by Nordlund (1982) in 3D convection
simulations. They use the single-ﬂuid MHD
approach to model the solar gas and mag-
netic ﬁeld. Radiative transfer in the photo-
sphere and lower chromosphere is treated us-
ing multi-group opacity binning with scatter-
ing (Skartlien 2000) with typically 4 radi-
ation bins. This multi-group scheme is not
well suited to model the few strong chromo-
spheric lines that cause the dominant radia-
tive energy losses in the upper chromosphere.
Therefore both codes employ parameterized
radiative cooling in those lines in the up-
per chromospherebased on the detailed radia-
tive transfer in a 1D dynamicalchromospheric
model (computed with the RADYN code, see
e.g.,Carlsson& Stein 2002). Radiative losses
in the corona are computed using an opti-callythinradiativelossfunction.Heatconduc-
tion parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld is included.
Two-dimensional simulations cannot maintain
a corona by themselves and require addi-
tional heating at the upper boundary. Three-
dimensional models however self-consistently
maintaina coronabyJoule heating.
Similar codes exist, such as Muram
(V¨ ogleret al.2005),CO5BOLD(Freytaget al.
2002; Wedemeyeret al. 2004) and RADMHD
(Abbett 2008). However these codes so far do
not support a corona (CO5BOLD, Muram) or
lack detailed treatment of the radiation ﬁeld
(RADMHD).
OSC has been used to study dynamic
ﬁbrils (DFs) by Hansteenet al. (2006) and
De Pontieuet al. (2007a). They conclude that
DFs are driven by magneto-acoustic shocks
based on the similarity in dynamic behavior
of wave-guidedshocksin a 2D simulationand
observations of DFs in the core of H α. Their
work has been extended to 3D in simulations
byMart´ ınez-Sykoraet al. (2009b).
3D simulations of ﬂux emergence from
the convection zone through the chromo-
sphere into the corona were performed by
Mart´ ınez-Sykoraetal. (2008, 2009a) A simi-
larsimulationshowedthepresenceofAlfv´ enic
waves with properties very much like what
has been observed with the Hinode spacecraft
(DePontieuetal. 2007b).
For a good overview of 3D solar atmo-
sphere modeling and post-processing in the
form of 3D radiative transfer I refer the
readertoCarlsson(2008,2009)andreferences
therein.
Despite the impressive progress that has
been madein the last 5 years,many,oftensur-
prisinglybasic propertiesof the chromosphere
are not yet reproduced in the models. In the
next section I discuss some of those observa-
tionalfactsandspeculateaboutwhatismissing
inthe models.Leenaarts: Simulations ofthe quiet chromosphere 3
3. Open questionsandchallenges
3.1. Lack ofextended magnetic
structurein CaII8542Å
TheﬁrstthingonenoticesinCaII8542Åline-
core images are the elongated structures de-
lineating magnetic ﬁeld lines around network
regions. The NLTE CaII 8542 Å computation
fromasnapshotofa3Dsimulationofthechro-
mosphere with OSC of Leenaartset al. (2009)
does, however, not show any such structures,
despitethepresenceofarelativelystrongmag-
neticﬁeld.Insteaditshowsthesignatureofos-
cillations and shocks, both in relatively ﬁeld-
free regions as in regions with stronger mag-
netic ﬁelds. Similar structures are observed in
CaII 8542 Å quiet regionsaway from the net-
work.Thelack ofﬁbrilsinthe simulationisin
my opinion the most pressing challenge mod-
elsofthechromospherecurrentlyface.
There can be many reasons for this lack.
It might be that such ﬁbrils require large-scale
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁgurationsthat do not ﬁt in
thetypicalsizeofthecomputationaldomainof
16×16×16Mm3.Itmightbethatthesimula-
tion cannot form ﬁbrils due to a lack of grid
resolution. Alternatively, ﬁbril-like structures
mightexist in the models,but the lackof reso-
lution inhibits mass loading of the ﬁbrils, pos-
sibly due to too large numerical viscosity (see
also Sec. 3.2). This lack of mass then trans-
lates into optically thin ﬁbrils. Another possi-
bility is that CaII 8542Å opacityin the ﬁbrils
is caused by physical processes currently not
modeled in the simulations, for example non-
equilibrium ionization or plasma e ﬀects that
cannot be modeled within the MHD assump-
tion.
3.2. Linebroadeningandbisector
The spatially averaged CaII 8542 Å line pro-
ﬁlecomputedin3DNLTEfromthesameOSC
snapshot shows a too narrow and too deep
linecorecomparedtoobservations(seeFigs.2
and 3 of Leenaartsetal. 2009). These calcu-
lations did not employ any non-physical mi-
croturbulence, and had a rather large grid cell
size of64×64×32km3. Thetoo narrowcorewas attributed to this lack of spatial resolu-
tion. Indeed, a newer simulation by Carlsson
(private communication) with a cell size of
32×32×16km3showsashallowerandwider
averageCaII 8542Å core, but not yet as wide
and shallow as observed. The increase in grid
resolution causes an increase in amplitude of
the velocity variations in the mid and upper
chromosphere,andhenceawideningoftheav-
erageproﬁle.
This result suggests that with even higher
resolution the width of the line core might at
least be qualitatively explained. However, the
observed proﬁle is at least partially formed in
ﬁbrils and as long as the models do not repro-
duce these the core width and depth remains
notcompletelyunderstood.
The low resolution simulation also did not
reproducethe observed inverse C-shape of the
CaII8542Ålinebisector.Similarresultswere
obtained earlier by Uitenbroek (2006) who
computed the NLTE line proﬁles from both
a 3D simulation that did not extend into the
corona and a dynamic 1D model. It would be
interesting to see whether the bisector shape
can be reproduced by high-resolution simula-
tions, or that it is determined by phenomena
currentlynotpresentinthe simulations.
3.3. Lackof Hαopacity
The identiﬁcation of DFs as magneto-acoustic
shocks guided along magnetic ﬁeld lines has
been established based on the excellent agree-
ment of dynamical properties observed in H α
with 2D simulations (Hansteenet al. 2006;
De Pontieuet al.2007a).
In a simulation with identical reso-
lution and magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration,
Leenaartsetal. (2007) investigated the e ﬀect
of non-equilibrium hydrogen ionization on
the chromosphere. They found that the hy-
drogenn=2 level populations and column
densities are much higher in the simulated
DFs than elsewhere in the chromosphere.
This is consistent with the observations where
DFs appear dark on top of a brighter, deeper
formed background. However, a subsequent
NLTE column-by-column radiative transfer
computation employing non-equilibrium4 Leenaarts: Simulations ofthe quiet chromosphere
Fig.1.Vertically emergent H αline core intensity from a 2D radiation-MHD simulation with
non-equilibrium hydrogen ionization taken into account. S tartup eﬀects are visible the ﬁrst 3
minutes. There is a weak imprint of upward propagating shock s, superimposed on a slower-
evolving pattern caused by granulation and reversed granul ation. No parabolic outlines of DFs
are presentasintheobservations(seeFig. 7ofDePontieuet al. 2007a).
Fig.2.Results of a NLTE radiative transfer computation of the H αline from a 3D radiation-
MHDsimulationwithanLTEequationofstate.Theblacklinei npanelsaandbindicatesthecut
shown in panel c and d. Panel a: vertically emergent intensit y in the far blue wing; b: vertically
emergentintensityatlinecenter;c:verticallyemergenti ntensityalongthecutindicatedinpanels
aandbforthebluewing(grey,left-handscale)andlinecent er(black,righthandscale);d: τ=1
heightforthebluewing(grey)andlinecenter(black).
temperatures and electron densities, but as-
sumingstatisticalequilibriumforthehydrogen
level-populations,showedthat the upperchro-
mosphere is transparent in the H αline core in
thissimulation.
Fig. 1 showsthe time-evolutionof the ver-
ticallyemergentHαlinecenterintensity.There
are magneticﬁeld concentrationsat x=4 Mm
andx=12 Mm along which DFs run up inthechromosphere.Theirtopsshouldappearas
paraboliccurvesinthis xt-slice,butinsteadthe
sliceshowsaslowlyevolvingpatternofgranu-
lation and reverse granulation. Superimposed
on this pattern is a weak imprint of upward
propagating shocks (the diagonal curves ema-
nating from the magnetic ﬁeld concentrations,
forexampletheonestartingat( x,t)=(5.5,10)
Analysis of the contribution functions showsLeenaarts: Simulations ofthe quiet chromosphere 5
that this imprint forms below 1 Mm, much
lower than the typical height of DFs (see Fig.
16ofDe Pontieuet al.2007a).
Fig.2showstheresultsofaNLTEcolumn-
by-column radiative transfer computation of a
snapshotofa3Dsimulationofﬂux-emergence
byMart´ ınez-Sykoraet al.(2008).Thissimula-
tion used an LTE equation of state unlike the
2D simulation that used a more realistic non-
equilibrium equation of state. Panels a and b
show that the Hαline core shows granulation,
even though itsτ=1 height lies between 0.3
and 1.7 Mm (panel d). The line source func-
tion is strongly scattering and set in the upper
photosphere, where it is sensitive to the tem-
peraturepatternofthe granulation.
Both the 2D non-equilibrium simulation
and the 3D LTE simulation show an H αline
center intensity pattern that is set in the upper
photosphere, in stark contrast to the observa-
tionswhichshowﬁbrilarstructureinallbutthe
quietest areas of the atmosphere.Even in such
quiet areas the observationsdo not show gran-
ulation, but signatures of shockwaves instead
(Ruttenet al.2008).
Some of the reasons that might cause the
absenceofﬁbrilsinthesimulatedCaII8542Å
line core also apply here: too small compu-
tational domain, too low spatial resolution or
the limitations of the MHD assumption. The
2D simulation necessarily had a rather simple
magnetic ﬁeld topology, which might inhibit
the formation of ﬁbrils and the mass loading
oftheupperchromosphere.The3Dsimulation
did not suﬀer from this, but it had lower reso-
lution and did not model non-equilibriumion-
ization. High resolution 3D models with non-
equilibrium hydrogen ionization might have a
chromospherethat isopticallythickinH α.
Hydrogen line formation is however noto-
riouslydiﬃculttomodel.Thenon-equilibrium
ionizationofhydrogendoesnotonlya ﬀectthe
electron density and temperature in the chro-
mosphere, it also has a strong e ﬀect on hydro-
gen line formation. The standard NLTE line
formationassumptionofstatisticalequilibrium
is notvalidbecauseoftheslow collisionaland
radiativetransitionratesascomparedtothehy-
drodynamicaltimescale.Inadditionatleastthe
Lyman-αndβlines need to be modeled withpartialfrequencyredistribution(PRD)because
of their strong inﬂuence on the H αline. Both
time-dependentradiative transfer and PRD ef-
fects were ignored in the results of Figs. 1
and 2. Inclusion of these e ﬀects might signif-
icantlyincreasetheH αopacity.
Thus, proper 3D modeling of the H αline
requires full time-dependent radiative transfer
with PRD in tandemwith the MHD evolution,
a Herculean task that has not even been done
in 1D hydrodynamic simulations. So far all
1D simulations perform radiative transfer
in complete redistribution (Carlsson& Stein
2002; Rammacher&Ulmschneider 2003;
Kaˇ sparov´ aetal. 2009).
An easier way out is to perform the 3D
radiation-MHD simulations with approximate
non-equilibrium hydrogen ionization follow-
ing the method developed by Sollum (1999)
as was done in 2D by Leenaartset al. (2007)
in order to get reasonably accurate values for
the electron density and temperature. One can
then perform time-dependent radiative radia-
tivetransferwithPRD onaseriesofsnapshots
from the simulation to get the H αline pro-
ﬁles.Thisseparatesthedetailedradiativetrans-
fer from the MHD computation, which signif-
icantly reduces the di ﬃculty of the problem.
However, even with this simpliﬁcation it re-
mains a daunting task to accurately model H α
lineformationinthedynamicchromosphere.
4. Summary& conclusions
Multidimensional radiation-MHD simulations
of the solar chromosphere are becoming in-
creasingly realistic. They have, amongst other
things,beenusedtostudydynamicﬁbrils,ﬂux
emergence and the propagation of Alfv´ enic
wavesintothecorona.
The modelsyet fail to reproducesome ob-
servationalfacts:
–simulatedCaII8542Å coreimagesdonot
showﬁbrils;
–the averagesimulated CaII 8542Å core is
deeper and narrower than observed and its
bisector not show the observed inverse C-
shape;
–the simulated Hαline core shows granu-
lation, both in 2D simulations with non-6 Leenaarts: Simulations ofthe quiet chromosphere
equilibriumeﬀectstakenintoaccountsand
in3Dwith anLTEequationofstate.
In order to reproduce these the models
probablyrequirehigherresolution,largercom-
putational domains, an improved treatment of
radiation and non-equilibrium hydrogen ion-
ization and inclusion of plasma e ﬀects. In or-
dertomodelhydrogentransitions,inparticular
Hα, 3D NLTE time-dependentradiative trans-
fercodesincludingPRDneedtobedeveloped.
Acknowledgements. J.L. acknowledges ﬁnancial
support by the European Commission through
the SOLAIRE Network (MTRN-CT-2006-035484)
and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc
Research (NWO).
References
Abbett, W. P. 2008, in Astronomical Society
of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 383,
Subsurface and Atmospheric Inﬂuences on
Solar Activity, ed. R. Howe, R. W. Komm,
K. S. Balasubramaniam, & G. J. D. Petrie ,
327
Carlsson, M. 2008, Physica Scripta Volume T,
133,014012
Carlsson, M. 2009, Memorie della Societa
AstronomicaItaliana,80,606
Carlsson, M. & Stein, R. F. 2002, ApJ, 572,
626
De Pontieu, B., Hansteen, V. H., Rouppe van
derVoort,L.,vanNoort,M.,&Carlsson,M.
2007a,ApJ,655,624
DePontieu,B.,McIntosh,S.W.,Carlsson,M.,
et al. 2007b,Science,318,1574
Freytag, B., Steﬀen, M., & Dorch, B. 2002,
AstronomischeNachrichten,323,213
Gudiksen, B. V., Carlsson, M., Hansteen, V.,
et al. 2010,A&A,inpreparation
Hansteen, V. H. 2004,in IAU Symposium,ed.
A. V. Stepanov, E. E. Benevolenskaya, &
A. G.Kosovichev,385–386
Hansteen, V. H., De Pontieu, B., Rouppe van
derVoort,L.,vanNoort,M.,&Carlsson,M.
2006,ApJ,647,L73
Kaˇ sparov´ a, J., Varady, M., Heinzel, P.,
Karlick´ y, M., & Moravec, Z. 2009, A&A,
499,923Leenaarts, J., Carlsson, M., Hansteen, V., &
Rouppe van der Voort, L. 2009, ApJ, 694,
L128
Leenaarts, J., Carlsson, M., Hansteen, V., &
Rutten,R. J. 2007,A&A,473,625
Mart´ ınez-Sykora,J.,Hansteen,V.,&Carlsson,
M.2008,ApJ,679,871
Mart´ ınez-Sykora,J.,Hansteen,V.,&Carlsson,
M.2009a,ApJ,702,129
Mart´ ınez-Sykora, J., Hansteen, V., DePontieu,
B., &Carlsson,M. 2009b,ApJ,701,1569
Nordlund,A.1982,A&A,107,1
Rammacher, W. & Ulmschneider, P. 2003,
ApJ,589,988
Rutten, R. J., van Veelen, B., & S¨ utterlin, P.
2008,Sol.Phys.,28
Skartlien,R. 2000,ApJ,536,465
Sollum,E.1999,Master’sthesis,Universityof
Oslo
Uitenbroek,H. 2006,ApJ,639,516
V¨ ogler, A., Shelyag, S., Sch¨ ussler, M., et al.
2005,A&A,429,335
Wedemeyer, S., Freytag, B., Ste ﬀen, M.,
Ludwig, H.-G., & Holweger, H. 2004,
A&A,414,1121