arXiv:1001.0272v1  [hep-ex]  2 Jan 2010A systematicstudyofthestronginteractionwith
¯PANDA
JohanMesschendorp∗forthe¯PANDA collaboration
KVI, University ofGroningen,TheNetherlands
E-mail:messchendorp@kvi.nl
The theoryof QuantumChromoDynamics(QCD) reproducesthe s tronginteractionat distances
much shorter than the size of the nucleon. At larger distance scales, the generation of hadron
massesandconﬁnementcannotyetbederivedfromﬁrstprinci plesonbasisofQCD.The ¯PANDA
experiment at FAIR will address the origin of these phenomen a in controlled environments.
Beams of antiprotons together with a multi-purpose and comp act detection system will provide
uniquetoolstoperformstudiesofthestronginteraction. T hiswillbeachievedviaprecisionspec-
troscopy of charmonium and open-charm states, an extensive search for exotic objects such as
glueballsandhybrids,in-mediumandhypernucleispectros copy,andmore. Anoverviewisgiven
ofthephysicsprogramofthe ¯PANDAcollaboration.
EuropeanPhysicalSocietyEurophysicsConferenceonHighE nergyPhysics,EPS-HEP2009,
July 16- 222009
Krakow, Poland
∗Speaker.
c/circlecopyrtCopyrightownedbytheauthor(s)underthetermsoftheCreat ive CommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlikeLicen ce. http://pos.sissa.it/Stronginteractionstudieswith ¯PANDA JohanMesschendorp
1. Introduction
The fundamental building blocks of QCD are the quarks which i nteract with each other by
exchanging gluons. QCD is well understood at short-distanc e scales, much shorter than the size
of a nucleon ( <10−15m). In this regime, the basic quark-gluon interaction is suf ﬁciently weak.
In fact, many processes at high energies can quantitatively be described by perturbative QCD.
Perturbation theory fails when the distance among quarks be comes comparable to the size of the
nucleon. Asaconsequenceofthestrongcoupling,weobserve therelativelyheavymassofhadrons,
such as protons and neutrons, which is two orders of magnitud e larger than the sum of the masses
of the individual quarks. This quantitatively yet-unexpla ined behavior is related to the effect of
chiral symmetry breaking.
The physics program of the ¯PANDA (anti-Proton ANnihilation at DArmstadt) collaborat ion
will address various questions related to the strong intera ctions by employing a multi-purpose de-
tector system [1, 2, 3] at the High Energy Storage Ring for ant i-protons (HESR) of the upcoming
Facility for Anti-proton and Ion Research (FAIR) [4]. The ¯PANDA collaboration aims to connect
the perturbative and the non-perturbative QCD regions, the reby providing insight in the mecha-
nisms of mass generation and conﬁnement. For this purpose, a large part of the program will be
devoted to charmonium spectroscopy; gluonic excitations, e.g. hybrids and glueballs; open and
hiddencharminnuclei. Inaddition, variousotherphysicst opicswillbestudiedwith ¯PANDAsuch
as the hyperon-nucleon and hyperon-hyperon interactions v iaγ-ray spectroscopy of hypernuclei;
CP violation studies exploiting rare decays in the D and/or Λsectors; studies of the structure of
the proton by measuring Generalized Parton Distributions ( Drell-Yan and Virtual-Compton Scat-
tering), "spin" structure functions using polarized anti- protons, and electro-magnetic form factors
in the time-like region.
2. The experimental facility
The key ingredient for the ¯PANDA physics program is a high-intensity and a high-resolu tion
beam of antiprotons in the momentum range of 1.5 to 15 GeV/c. S uch a beam gives access to
a center-of-mass energy range from 2.2 to 5.5 GeV/c2in ¯ppannihilations. In this range, a rich
spectrum of hadrons with various quark conﬁgurations can be studied. In particular, hadronic
states which contain charmed quarks and gluon-rich matter b ecome experimentally accessible.
The¯PANDA detector will be installed at the High Energy Storage R ing, HESR, at the fu-
ture Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research, FAIR. FAIR pr ovides a storage ring for beams of
phase-space cooled antiprotons withunprecedented qualit y and intensity [15]. Antiprotons will be
transferred to the HESR where internal-target experiments in the beam momentum range of 1.5 –
15GeV/ccanbeperformed. Electronandstochastic phase spa cecooling willbeavailable toallow
for experiments with either high momentum resolution of abo ut∼10−5at reduced luminosity or
with high luminosity up to2 ×1032cm−1s−1with anenlarged momentum spread of ∼10−4.
The¯PANDA detector is designed as a large acceptance multi-purp ose setup. The experiment
will use internal targets. It is conceived to use either pell ets of frozen H 2or cluster jet targets for
the ¯ppreactions, and wiretargets for the ¯ pAreactions.
2Stronginteractionstudieswith ¯PANDA JohanMesschendorp
Toaddress thedifferent physics topics, the detector needs tocope withavariety of ﬁnal states
and a large range of particle momenta and emission angles. At present, the detector is being de-
signedtohandlehighratesof107annihilations/s ,withgoodparticle identiﬁcation andmom entum
resolution for γ,e,µ,π,K, andpwith the ability to measure D,K0
S, andΛwhich decay at
displaced vertices. Furthermore, the detector will have an almost 4πdetection coverage both for
charged particles and photons. This is an essential require ment for an unambiguous partial wave
analysis of resonance states. Various design and physics pe rformance studies [16] are ongoing,
partly making use of adedicated computing framework for sim ulations and data analysis.
3.¯PANDAphysicstopics
Thelevelschemeoflower-lyingbound ¯ ccstates,charmonium,isverysimilartothatofpositro-
nium. Thesecharmoniumstatescanbedescribedfairlywelli ntermsofheavy-quarkpotentialmod-
els. Precision measurements of the mass and width of the char monium spectrum give, therefore,
access to the conﬁnement potential in QCD.Extensive measur ements of the masses and widths of
the 1−Ψstates have been performed at e+e−machines where they can be formed directly via a
virtual-photon exchange. Otherstates,whichdonotcarryt hesamequantumnumberasthephoton,
cannot be populated directly, but only via indirect product ion mechanisms. This is in contrast to
the ¯ppreaction, which can form directly excited charmonium state s of all quantum numbers. Asa
result, theresolution inthemassandwidthof charmonium st ates isdetermined bytheprecision of
thephase-space cooled beam momentum distribution andnot b ythe(signiﬁcantly poorer) detector
resolution. Theneed for such atool becomes evident by revie wing the many open questions inthe
charmonium sector. For example, our understanding of the st ates above the D¯Dthreshold is very
poor and needs to be explored in more detail. Recent experime ntal evidences (see review [5]) hint
at awhole series of surprisingly narrow states with masses a nd properties which, so-far, cannot be
interpreted consistently by theory. Besides the spectrosc opy of charmonium states, ¯PANDA will
alsoprovidethecapabilitytoperformopen-charmspectros copy astheanalogofthehydrogenatom
inQED(heavy-light system). Strikingdiscrepancies ofrec entlydiscovered DsJstatesbyBaBar[6]
andCLEO[7]withmodel calculations havebeenobserved. Pre cisionmeasurements ofthemasses
and widths of these states using antiprotons and by performi ng near-threshold scans are needed to
shed light on these open problems.
The self-coupling of gluons in strong QCD has an important co nsequence, namely that QCD
predictshadronicsystemsconsistingofonlygluons,glueb alls,orboundsystemsofquark-antiquark
pairs with a strong gluon component, hybrids. These systems cannot be categorized as "ordinary"
hadrons containing valence q¯qorqqq. The additional degrees of freedom carried by gluons allow
glueballs and hybrids to have spin-exotic quantum numbers, JPC, that are forbidden for normal
mesons and other fermion-antifermion systems. States with exotic quantum numbers provide the
best opportunity to distinguish between gluonic hadrons an dq¯qstates. Exotic states with con-
ventional quantum numbers can be identiﬁed by measuring an o verpopulation of the meson spec-
trum and by comparing properties, like masses, quantum numb ers, and decay channels, with - for
instance - predictions from Lattice Quantum Chromodynamic s (LQCD) calculations. The most
promising energy range to discover unambiguously hybrid st ates and glueballs is in the region of
3-5 GeV/c2,inwhichnarrow states areexpected tobesuperimposed onas tructureless continuum.
3Stronginteractionstudieswith ¯PANDA JohanMesschendorp
In this region, LQCD predicts an exotic 1−+¯cc-hybrid state with a mass of 4.2-4.5 GeV/c2and
a glueball state around 4.5 GeV/c2with an exotic quantum number of JPC=0+−[8, 9]. The ¯ pp
production cross section of these exotic states are similar to conventional states and in the order
of 100 pb. All other states with ordinary quantum numbers are expected to have cross sections of
about 1µb.
One of the challenges in nuclear physics is to study the prope rties of hadrons and the modi-
ﬁcation of these properties when the hadron is embedded in a n uclear many-body system. Only
recently it became experimentally evident that the propert ies of mesons, such as masses of π,K,
andωmesons, change in adense environment [10, 11, 12, 13]. The ¯PANDAexperiment provides
a unique possibility to extend these studies towards the hea vy-quark sector by exploiting the ¯ pA
reaction. For instance, an in-medium modiﬁcation of the mas s of theDmeson would imply a
modiﬁcation of the energy threshold for the production of Dmesons, compared to a free mass. In
addition, a lowering of the D-meson mass could cause charmonium states which lie just bel ow the
D¯Dthreshold for the ¯ ppchannel to reside above the threshold for the ¯ pAreaction. In such a case,
the width of the charmonium state will drastically increase , which can experimentally be veriﬁed.
Although this is intuitively a simple picture, in practice t he situation is more complicated since
the mass of various charmonium states might also change insi de the nuclear medium. Besides the
indirect in-medium studies as described above, ¯PANDA will be capable to directly measure the
in-medium spectral shape of charmonium states. This can be a chieved by measuring the invariant
mass of thedi-lepton decay products. For the Ψ(3770), for instance, models predict mass shifts of
the order of –100 MeV[14],which are experimentally feasibl e to observe.
So far, this paper has concentrated on only a few of the topics which will be addressed by the
¯PANDA collaboration. There exists, however, a large variet y of other physics topics which can
ideally be studied with the ¯PANDA setup at the antiproton facility at FAIR. For example, there is
growinginterest withinthe ¯PANDAcollaboration tomakeuseofelectro-magnetic probes , photons
and leptons, in antiproton-proton annihilation. These pro bes will be used to study the structure
of the proton by measuring Generalized Parton Distribution s (GPDs), to determine quark distribu-
tion functions via Drell-Yan processes, and to obtain time- like electro-magnetic form factors by
exploiting the ¯ pp→e+e−reaction with an intermediate massive virtual photon. Furt hermore, the
¯PANDAcollaboration hastheambitiontoperformhypernucle i experiments, whichenablesastudy
of the hyperon-nucleon and hyperon-hyperon interactions. Finally, plans for symmetry violation
experiments with ¯PANDAwillopenawindowontophysicsbeyondtheStandardMod elofparticle
physics.
4. Summary
The¯PANDA experiment at FAIR will address a wide range of topics i n the ﬁeld of QCD, of
whichonlyasmallpartcouldbepresentedinthispaper. Thep hysicsprogramwillbeconductedby
using beams of antiprotons together with a multi-purpose de tection system, which enables experi-
mentswithhighluminositiesandprecisionresolution. Thi scombinationprovidesuniquepossibili-
tiestostudyhadronmatterviaprecisionspectroscopy ofth echarmonium systemandthediscovery
of new hadronic matter, such as charmed hybrids or glueballs , as well as by measuring the prop-
erties of hadronic particles in dense environments. New ins ights in the structure of the proton will
4Stronginteractionstudieswith ¯PANDA JohanMesschendorp
beobtained byexploiting electromagnetic probes. Further more, thenextgeneration ofhypernuclei
spectroscopy will be conducted by the ¯PANDA collaboration and at the J-PARC facility in Japan.
Tosummarize, ¯PANDAhastheambitiontoprovidevaluableandnewinsightsi ntheﬁeldofhadron
physics which would bridge our present knowledge obtained i nthe ﬁeldof perturbative QCDwith
that of non-perturbative QCDand nuclear structure.
Acknowledgments
Theauthor acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the Unive rsity of Groningen and the GSI
Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung GmbH,Darmsta dt.
References
[1] PANDA Collaboration,TechnicalProgressReportfor ¯PANDA,FAIR-ESAC2005,
http://www-panda.gsi.de
[2] PANDA Collaboration,TechicalDesignReportforthePAN DA SolenoidandDipoleSpectrometer
Magnets, arXiv:0907.0169 .
[3] PANDA Collaboration,TechicalDesignReportforthePAN DA ElectromagneticCalorimeter(EMC),
arXiv:0810.1216 .
[4] http://www.gsi.de/fair/index.html
[5] T.Barnes, hep-ph/0608103 .
[6] B. Aubert et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 90,242001(2003).
[7] D.Besson et al.,Phys.Rev. D68,032002(2003).
[8] C. MorningstarandM.Peardon, Phys.Rev. D60,034509(1999).
[9] G.S.Bali, Eur.Phys.J. A19,1(2004).
[10] K.Suzuki et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 92,072302(2004).
[11] R. Barth et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 78,4007(1997).
[12] F. Laue etal.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 82,1640(1999).
[13] D.Trnka etal.,Phys.Rev.Lett. 94,192303(2005).
[14] S.H.Lee, nucl-th/0310080 .
[15] TheHighEnergyStorageRing,http://www.fz-juelich. de/ikp/hesr/
[16] PANDA Collaboration,PhysicsPerformanceReportforP ANDA,arXiv:0903.3905 .
5