arXiv:1001.0327v1  [nucl-th]  2 Jan 2010Is chiral symmetry manifested in nuclear structure?
R.J. Furnstahl1and A. Schwenk2,3,4
1Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43 210, USA
2TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2A3, Canada
3ExtreMe Matter Institute EMMI, GSI, 64291 Darmstadt, German y
4Institut f¨ ur Kernphysik, TU Darmstadt, 64289 Darmstadt, Ger many
E-mail:furnstahl.1@osu.edu, schwenk@triumf.ca
Abstract. Spontaneously broken chiral symmetry is an established property of low-
energy quantum chromodynamics, but ﬁnding direct evidence for it from nuclear
structure data is a diﬃcult challenge. Indeed, phenomenologically su ccessful energy-
density functional approaches do not even have explicit pions. Are there smoking guns
for chiral symmetry in nuclei?
1. Challenge
Spontaneously broken chiral symmetry is a key property of quant um chromodynamics
(QCD) at low energies. It gives rise to pseudo-scalar Goldstone bos ons, the pions, which
because of non-zero light quark masses are not massless, but are much lighter than other
hadrons. Fornuclear forces, theimmediate consequence istheon e-pion-exchange (OPE)
potential with its long range and characteristic tensor structure . In more detail there
are constraints on the form of interactions in eﬀective low-energy Lagrangians [1, 2, 3].
Since nuclear structure is ultimately determined by low-energy QCD a nd the nuclear
Fermi momentum is comparable to 2 mπ, one might expect stark evidence from data for
the ﬁngerprint of chiral symmetry. Thus we pose the question: Ca n we ﬁnd smoking
guns for chiral symmetry in nuclei?
Because calculations based on chiral symmetry consequences (un derstood broadly
to range from including OPE to full consistency with chiral symmetry constraints in
low-energy Lagrangians) are becoming increasingly able to describe nuclear structure,
one might think the question is moot. But we are not asking here whet her theories
or models consistent with chiral symmetry are suﬃcient to describe data, but whether
the experimental data says this physics is necessary. This is a more diﬃcult question
and one with some counterexamples to the need for explicit chiral sy mmetry. At one
extreme, pionless eﬀective ﬁeld theory (EFT) describes few-body scattering at very low
energies and nuclear binding up to at least the alpha particle [1, 4]. At the other
extreme, energy-density functional approaches to medium and h eavy nuclei (such as
Skyrme) have wide phenomenological success without explicit pions [5 ].Is chiral symmetry manifested in nuclear structure? 2
In trying to identify manifestations of chiral symmetry, it is importa nt to make the
distinction between long-range chiral physics and short-range ph ysics, which may be
free of chiral symmetry constraints. Nuclear structure will in gen eral have contributions
from both. To ﬁnd a smoking gun, one will likely need to identify observ ables (or
combinations of observables) that are sensitive to the long-range parts.
Because it is spontaneously broken, chiral symmetry most directly relates processes
with diﬀerent numbers of pions. Clear signatures of chiral symmetr y, even of the most
basic pion properties (such as OPE), can become a more subtle ques tion for processes
with no pions in the initial or ﬁnal state, which include nuclear structu re properties
such as binding energies and spectra. The signatures can be partic ularly obscured for
bulk properties, where the pion eﬀects at the mean-ﬁeld level may b e washed out by
spin and isospin averaging.
2. Smoking guns for chiral symmetry in other contexts
For our challenge to ﬁnd smoking guns in nuclear structure we adopt a broad deﬁnition
of evidence for chiral symmetry, which encompasses the quantita tive implications of a
lightpionanditsquantumnumbers (such asOPE)aswell asthemores ubtle eﬀectsthat
constrain low-energy chiral Lagrangians. Such smoking guns for s pontaneously broken
chiral symmetry are readily found in data from other strong intera ction contexts. The
spectrum of mesons is the most obvious, where m2
π≪m2
ρmanifests the approximate
Goldstone boson nature of the pion and would-be parity doublets (e .g., theρanda1) are
split in mass. The physics of low-energy π–πandπ–Nscattering, which is governed by
chiral physics, provide many other examples. Here the successes of chiral perturbation
theory closely tie experiment and theory through chiral symmetry [6, 7].
For nucleon-nucleon (NN) interactions, the situation is more subtle . For example,
the unnaturally large NN scattering lengths are not related to chira l symmetry, but
dominate the physics at very low energies. However, a compelling pro totype for the sort
of direct evidence for chiral symmetry we seek from nuclear struc ture data can be found
in the partial-wave analyses of NN scattering by the Nijmegen group and collaborators.
This example also lets us deﬁne more concretely what we are looking fo r. Simply an
improved χ2for a ﬁt to NN data using interactions with an input one-pion exchang e
potential (or two-pion exchange) is not the strong and direct evid ence we prefer. (After
all, it is possible to ﬁt this data accurately with inverse scattering pot entials with no
pion exchange component.) Rather it is the unbiased extraction thr ough the ﬁtting
process of pion parameters that we call a smoking gun.
As part of the analysis described in Ref. [8], the masses of the charg ed and neutral
pions were used as ﬁt parameters. The extracted values agreed w ith experiment within
estimated one percent errors. At the same time the pion-nucleon c oupling was obtained
from the ﬁt and found consistent with extracted values from π–Nscattering [8, 9]. The
data provides very clear signals for this coupling; indeed, the ppπ0coupling is said to
be determined from each individual partial wave except for1S0[8].Is chiral symmetry manifested in nuclear structure? 3
Subsequent studies looked at the partial wave analysis with a ﬁner m icroscope and
founddirectevidence oftwo-pionexchange(TPE) physics[10,11]. Fittingthepionmass
again but now as a parameter in the TPE potential gave agreement w ith experiment
at the ten percent level. Other evidence includes consistency of th ecicouplings of the
sub-leading TPE with determinations from π–Nscattering. It is worth noting that
the sub-leading TPE provides the long-range part of three-nucleo n (3N) forces. Finding
smoking gunsforchiral symmetry innuclear structure maytheref orebetiedtoincluding
3N interactions.
In the example of NN phase shifts, the sensitivity to pion physics can be enhanced
by concentrating on the peripheral partial waves (e.g., G-waves a nd higher are fully
explained by pion exchanges). This isolates the long-distance physic s, which is chiral
physics. Even so, a careful analysis of statistical and systematic errors together with a
large database was required to cleanly extract the direct evidence for sub-leading chiral
eﬀects. This highlights the diﬃculty in meeting the challenge for nuclea r structure,
where the chiral origin of mid-range physics from TPE may be diﬃcult t o resolve.
3. Opportunities
There aremany opportunitiesto buildonexisting eﬀortsinthesearc h for chiral smoking
guns. The growing applications of chiral EFT to nuclear structure t hrough no-core
shell model, coupled cluster, and lattice EFT calculations are building f oundations
for the desired evidence from data and for investigations similar to t he NN partial-
wave analyses. We emphasize again that while phenomenological succ ess starting from
microscopic theories incorporating chiral symmetry is gratifying, t his type of indirect
evidence is not what we are looking for. As the accuracy improves, h owever, we can
ask whether distinctions that point to pions and then more subtle ch iral symmetry
constraints will become apparent (as with TPE in the prototype par tial-wave analysis).
For nuclear structure evidence, many-body force contributions from long-range TPE
may be key.
Other possibilities for smoking guns are in shell-model calculations tha t start
from interactions including pion physics, with monopole (or more) adj ustments ﬁt to
reproduce spectra and binding energies in a major shell. Do the ﬁts o f shell-model
interactions favor pion exchanges for the long-range parts? If s o, is it possible to isolate
data that are most sensitive to the long-range parts (e.g., to cons train their sub-leading
contributions)?
A third category may provide the greatest challenge to ﬁnding explic it chiral
symmetry: energy-density functionals (EDF). Accurate calculat ions of binding energies
and other properties are made across the mass table by EDF’s such as Skyrme or Gogny,
which do not have explicit pions. Relativistic EDF’s in principle start with p ions but
they do not contribute at the mean-ﬁeld level used in relativistic phe nomenology. Naive
dimensional analysis for ﬁt parameters in EDF’s (Skyrme or covarian t) is suggestive of
chiral signatures [12, 13] but is not quantitative enough to be conc lusive. We expectIs chiral symmetry manifested in nuclear structure? 4
generalized EDF’s will be needed to ﬁnd smoking guns.
There have been many studies that hint at a special role for chiral s ymmetry in
nuclear structure. These include a wide array of models that impleme nt a partial
restoration of chiral symmetry at ﬁnite density, in-medium QCD sum rules, and Brown-
Rho scaling (see for example Refs. [14, 15]). None of these rise as ye t to the level of a
smokinggunfornuclearstructure; thechallengeistomakethemsu ﬃcientlyquantitative
and predictive based on data (rather than model input).
Other direct possibilities for ﬁnding smoking guns of chiral symmetry may lie with
in-medium chiral EFT, which has been under recent development (se e Refs. [3, 16]
and references therein). There are open questions, such as the convergence of the
perturbative approach, but it has the explicit chiral ingredients ne eded. We can ask: are
there unique predictions from long-range pion physics? These may b e diﬃcult to ﬁnd,
as illustrated by the subtleties in pinning down the origin of the spin-or bit splittings in
nuclei. One might hope for the same type ﬁtting as in NN phase shifts. A possibility
already being considered is the ﬁtting of energy-density functiona ls that have been
supplemented with long-range chiral EFT physics. This would mean let ting the pion
parameters ﬂoat in the ﬁts in the same way as in the Nijmegen phase s hift analyses.
The answer is as yet unknown to even the most basic question: Do me dium and heavy
nuclei know the pion mass and coupling?
What can we say in general about where one should look for chiral sy mmetry
signatures? Searching in bulk properties will be diﬃcult because of th e averaging
of pion contributions and the important role of short-range physic s. The task is to
identify observables (analogous to peripheral partial waves) tha t isolate contributions
from long-range pion physics. Past suggestions have included single -particle energies,
where the pion tensor force may be isolated; isotopechains, where small diﬀerences from
the isospin dependence due to pion exchanges including long-range 3 N forces may be
ampliﬁed; collective excitations with pionic quantum numbers; electro weak axial-charge
transitions and properties of pionic atoms (see for example Refs. [1 6, 17, 18]).
4. Final comments
Our challenge to nuclear structure theorists is to search for directmanifestations
of chiral symmetry in nuclei. Success in this quest will help to unify des criptions
of strong-interaction phenomena, identify sensitivities that can s uggest proﬁtable
new experiments, guide microscopic calculations of nuclear propert ies toward greater
precision, and foreshadow what to expect under extreme conditio ns. It can also lead to
ties to lattice QCD, whose growing successes give rise to dreams of d irect calculations
of the lightest nuclei, enabling new insights to chiral symmetry in nucle ar structure.
However, the challenge to ﬁnd smoking guns can also be constructiv ely answered in a
negative way, by showing that explicit chiral symmetry is notnecessary for particular
nuclear structure observables. So an alternative question to pos e is: where are eﬀective
ﬁeld theories of nuclei without pionic degrees of freedom applicable?Is chiral symmetry manifested in nuclear structure? 5
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. PHY–0653312, the UNEDF SciDAC Collaboration under DOE Grant DE-FC02-
07ER41457, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun cil of Canada
(NSERC), and by the Helmholtz Alliance Program of the Helmholtz Asso ciation,
contract HA216/EMMI “Extremes of Density and Temperature: C osmic Matter in the
Laboratory”. TRIUMF receives federal funding via a contribution agreement through
the National Research Council of Canada.
References
[1] P. F. Bedaque and U. van Kolck. Eﬀective ﬁeld theory for few-nu cleon systems. Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. , 52:339, 2002.
[2] E. Epelbaum. Few-nucleon forces and systems in chiral eﬀective ﬁeld theory. Prog. Part. Nucl.
Phys., 57:654, 2006.
[3] E. Epelbaum, H.-W. Hammer, and U.-G. Meißner. Modern theory of nuclear forces. Rev. Mod.
Phys., 81:1773, 2009.
[4] L. Platter. Few-body systems and the pionless eﬀective ﬁeld the ory. arXiv:0910.0031.
[5] M. Bender, P.-H. Heenen, and P.-G. Reinhard. Self-consistent m ean-ﬁeld models for nuclear
structure. Rev. Mod. Phys. , 75:121, 2003.
[6] J. Gasser and H. Leutwyler. Chiral perturbation theory to one loop.Ann. Phys. , 158:142, 1984.
[7] V. Bernard and U.-G. Meißner. Chiral perturbation theory. Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. , 57:33,
2007.
[8] V. G. J. Stoks, R. Timmermans, and J. J. de Swart. On the pion–n ucleon coupling constant.
Phys. Rev. C , 47:512, 1993.
[9] U. van Kolck, M. C. M. Rentmeester, J. L. Friar, J. T. Goldman, a nd J. J. de Swart.
Electromagneticcorrectionsto the one-pion-exchangepotentia l.Phys. Rev. Lett. , 80:4386,1998.
[10] M. C. M. Rentmeester, R. G. E. Timmermans, J. L. Friar, and J. J. de Swart. Chiral two-pion
exchange and proton-proton partial-wave analysis. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 82:4992, 1999.
[11] M. C. M. Rentmeester, R. G. E. Timmermans, and J. J. de Swart . Determination of the chiral
coupling constants c3andc4in new proton-proton and neutron-proton partial-wave analyses .
Phys. Rev. C , 67:044001, 2003.
[12] J. L. Friar, D. G. Madland, and B. W. Lynn. QCD scales in ﬁnite nuc lei.Phys. Rev. C , 53:3085,
1996.
[13] R. J. Furnstahl. Neutron radii in mean-ﬁeld models. Nucl. Phys. A , 706:85, 2002.
[14] U. Mosel. Chiral symmetry in nuclei – Theoretical expectations and hard facts. Mod. Phys. Lett.
A, 23:2371, 2008.
[15] M. C. Birse. Chiral symmetry in nuclei: Partial restoration and it s consequences. J. Phys. G ,
20:1537, 1994.
[16] W. Weise. Yukawa’s pion, low-energy QCD and nuclear chiral dyna mics.Prog. Theor. Phys.
Suppl., 170:161, 2007.
[17] G. E. Brown and M. Rho. On the manifestation of chiral symmetr y in nuclei and dense nuclear
matter. Phys. Rept. , 363:85, 2002.
[18] T. Otsuka, T. Suzuki, J. D. Holt, A. Schwenk, and Y. Akaishi. Th ree-body forces and the limit
of oxygen isotopes, arXiv:0908.2607.