arXiv:1001.0794v1  [astro-ph.IM]  6 Jan 2010Consequences of spectrograph illumination for the accuracy of
radial-velocimetry
Boisse, I.1,a, Bouchy,F.1,2,Chazelas,B.3,Perruchot,S.2,Pepe,F.3,Lovis,C.3,andH´ ebrard,G.1
1Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, Universit´ e Pierre et M arie Curie, UMR7095 CNRS, 98bis bd. Arago, 75014 Paris,
France
2ObservatoiredeHauteProvence,CNRS /OAMP, 04870St Michell’Observatoire,France
3ObservatoiredeGen` eve,Universit´ ede Gen` eve,51Ch. des Maillettes, 1290Sauverny,Switzerland
Abstract. Forﬁber-fedspectrographs witha stable external waveleng th source, scrambling properties of opti-
cal ﬁbers and, homogeneity and stabilityof the instrument i llumination are important for the accuracy of radial-
velocimetry. Optical cylindric ﬁbers are known to have good azimuthal scrambling. In contrast, the radial one
is not perfect. In order to improve the scrambling ability of the ﬁber and to stabilize the illumination, optical
doublescramblerareusuallycoupledtotheﬁbers.Despitet hat,ourexperience onSOPHIEandHARPShaslead
to identiﬁed remaining radial-velocity limitations due to the non-uniform illumination of the spectrograph. We
conductedtestsonSOPHIEwithtelescopevignetting,seein gvariationandcenteringerrorsontheﬁberentrance.
We simulated the light path through the instrument in order t o explain the radial velocity variation obtained
with our tests. We then identiﬁed the illumination stabilit y and uniformity has a critical point for the extremely
high-precisionradialvelocityinstruments(ESPRESSO@VL T,CODEX@E-ELT).Testsonsquareandoctagonal
section ﬁbers are now under development and SOPHIE will be us ed as a bench test to validate these new feed
optics.
1 Introduction
High-precisionradial-velocimetry(RV)isstillamaintec h-
nique in the search and characterization of planetary sys-
tems.Uptodate,mostoftheknownextrasolarplanetshave
been detected with this method. It will remain at the fore-
front of exoplanet science for the coming years thanks to
itseﬃciencyinﬁndinglow-massplanetssinceHARPShas
reached an RV accuracy less than 1ms−1(ref. [7]). In the
aim to reach Earth-type planets and, also measure the ex-
pansion of the universe, new spectrographs in the visible
are nowin studyto reacha precisionofonlyfew cms−1in
the near future (ESPRESSO@VLT [8], CODEX@E-ELT
[9]).
To reach this level of accuracy, we must avoid a cer-
tain number of limitations. Among these, one can quote
the stellar noise (activity, pulsation, surface granulati on),
thecontaminationbyexternalsources(moon,close-byob-
jects,backgroundcontinuum),andwhatlightmayencounter
duringitspath(e.g.atmosphericdispersion).Aspartofin -
strumental factors, CCD cosmetics, charge transfer ine ﬃ-
ciency(ref.[2]),wavelengthcalibration(refs.[5]and[1 2])
shouldbementioned.Foranexhaustivediscussionofthese
limitations,we refer to[10]. Theauthorshighlightthe im-
pact of the spectrograph illumination as one of the main
limiting factors, and the need to analyze and quantify it.
In this proceeding, we then focus on the limitation due to
ae-mail:iboisse@iap.frthe injection of light in the ﬁber-fed spectrograph. This
work is based on our experiment on two high-resolution,
high-precision ﬁber-fed spectrographs, SOPHIE@1.93m,
Observatoire de Haute-Provence (OHP), France (refs. [3]
and [11]) and HARPS@3.6m, EuropeanSouthernObser-
vatory(ESO)-LaSilla, Chile (ref.[7]).
Up to day, SOPHIE has a Doppler accuracy of about
5 ms−1, as most of high-accuracy spectrographs involved
in exoplanet survey. In service since November 2006, we
identiﬁed that instrumental limitations mainly come from
theoldCassegrainFiberAdaptater(developedforELODIE
spectrograph).In order to reach the so far unique HARPS
level of accuracy,we conductedtests that illustrate the in -
complete ﬁber scrambling. Detected with SOPHIE, these
eﬀectswerealsocharacterizedonHARPSatalowerlevel.
Inthedevelopmentofthefutureinstruments,theoptimiza-
tion ofSOPHIEis a benchtest forthe improvementofthe
spectrographilluminationuniformityandstability.
The proceedingis structured as followed. In a the sec-
ondsection,weexposethepropertiesoftheﬁber-fedspec-
trographsandthelightinjection.Thethirdsectionreview s
the diﬀerent eﬀects that are detected in the RV due to the
incompleteandimperfectscramblingobtainedwiththestan -
dard ﬁbers. In the last section, we describe solutions pro-
posedtooptimizetheﬁbersscrambling.EPJWeb ofConferences
2 Fiber-fedspectrographs
HARPS and SOPHIE are ﬁber-fed spectrographs with si-
multaneousreferencecalibrations.Thestellarlightcoll ected
by the telescope are lead to the instrument througha stan-
dard step-index multi-mode cylindrical optical ﬁber. SO-
PHIE has two observing mode using two di ﬀerent ﬁbers,
the High-Resolution (HR) and the High-E ﬃciency mode
(HE). In HR mode, the spectrograph is fed by a 40.5- µm
slitsuperimposedontheoutputofthe100- µmﬁber,reach-
ing a spectral resolution of λ/∆λ=75,000. In HE mode,
thespectrographisdirectlyfedbythe100- µmﬁberwith a
resolution power of 40,000. Both SOPHIE ﬁbers have an
sky acceptance of 3-arcsec. HARPS has 70- µm ﬁber with
a sky acceptance of 1-arcsec and a spectral resolution of
110,000(seeTable1).
Non-uniform illumination of the slit or output ﬁber at
thespectrographentrancedecreasestheradial-velocityp re-
cision.Indeed,variationsinseeing,focusandimageshape
at the ﬁber entrance may induced non-uniform illumina-
tioninside the pupilofthe spectrograph.Theoptical aber-
rationsleadtovariationsinthecentroidsofthestellarli nes
onthefocalplane.
Optical ﬁbers are used to lead the light from the tele-
scope to the entrance of the spectrograph. They have the
propertiestoscramblertheatmospherice ﬀectsandguiding
and centering errors discussed previously. But the scram-
blingabilityofonemultimodeﬁberisnotperfectasshown
inFig.1.Withaninputo ﬀaxesimage,theazimuthalscram-
bling is good whereas it remains some e ﬀects in the ra-
dial one. This pattern observed is bigger in far ﬁeld than
in near ﬁeld. Near ﬁeld and far ﬁeld are respectively de-
ﬁned as, the brightness distribution across the output face
oftheﬁber,and,astheangulardistributionoflightofﬁber
output beam. Therefore, changes in the input beam cause
onlycircularsymmetricchangesintheﬁberoutputpattern.
Incontrast,imperfectradialscramblingallowssmallzona l
errorsto remain.
HARPS and the SOPHIE HR modeare equippedwith
optical double scramblers. It is used to increase and im-
prove the uniformity and stabilization of the illumination
of the spectrograph entrance (refs. [4] and [6]). The near
ﬁeld of a circular ﬁber is observed to be better scramble
than the far ﬁeld. In spite of only one ﬁber guiding the
light from the telescope to the instrument, double scram-
bler is composedof two ﬁbers coupledwith two doublets.
The system is designed to inverse near ﬁeld and far ﬁeld
in order to induce a better radial scrambling, although it
causesﬂuxlosses(ref.[1]).
Table 1. Comparison of parameters of ﬁber-fed spectrographs
SOPHIEandHARPS .
Instrument Doppler prec. 1 pixel Resol. ∆λ/λ
HARPS/lessorequalslant1ms−1800 ms−1110,000
SOPHIE(HR) ∼4ms−11400 ms−175,000
SOPHIE(HE) ∼10ms−11400 ms−140,000
Fig. 1.Illumination at the output of one cylindrical optical ﬁber
in the near and the far ﬁeld. Sources are o ﬀaxes. A high degree
ofazimuthalscramblingisobserved.Incontrast,itremain ssome
eﬀects inthe radial one.
3 RVeﬀectsof ﬁberimperfect scrambling
3.1 Centering/Guiding onthe ﬁber entrance
The degree of radial scrambling describes the stability of
theoutputbeamastheinputimageismovedfromthecen-
ter to the edge of the ﬁber. It is possible to detect in RV
some variations due to the insu ﬃciency of radial scram-
bling. The light from a stable star is movedwith the guid-
ing/centeringsystemfromanedgetotheotheroftheﬁber.
We compute the RV with the data reduction pipeline for
diﬀerent positions of the star. The test was done for the
two modes of SOPHIE and for HARPS. The results are
computedinTable2.
Because the scrambling of the ﬁber is not perfect, the
movementofthe inputimagecorrespondstoa shiftonthe
Table 2. Variation observed in RV as the input image (star) is
moved from the center to the edge of the ﬁber. HARPS and SO-
PHIEwithHigh-Resolutionﬁberusedadoublescramblerinst ead
of the High-Eﬃciency mode of SOPHIE.
Instrument ﬁb.diam. RVe ﬀect [ms−1]
HARPS 1” ∼3
SOPHIE(HR) 3” ∼13
SOPHIE(HE) 3” ∼36Newtechnologiesforprobingthe diversityofbrowndwarfsa ndexoplanets
Fig. 2.Schema illustrating how the vignetting of the telescope
is translated at the output of the ﬁber HE in the far-ﬁeld, i.e . at
theentranceofthespectrograph.Forexternaloccultation ,theRV
decrease whereas, for internal occultationthe RV increase .
detector.Weobservedﬁrstthat,wideristheﬁber,moreim-
portant is the RV variations. Moreover,the value of meter
per second per pixel vary as a function of the resolution
power.Movingtheinputimagefromthecentertotheedge
isthenexpectedtohavealowere ﬀectforahigherspectral
resolution.Inaddition,weexpectthatthedoublescramble r
improvetheradialscrambling,i.e. decreasetheRV e ﬀect.
3.2 Vignetting telescope
Thepupilofthetelescope,i.e.theentranceofthetelescop e
orthefarﬁeldoftheinputlightisknowntobemorestable
than the telescope image. We would like to test the e ﬀect
in RV of variations of the far ﬁeld. For that, we vignette
the telescope onday skywith the dome.We computedthe
RV with the pipeline SOPHIE, estimating that the varia-
tion of Barycentric Earth RV is not signiﬁcant during our
measurements.We madethistest with the HE modein or-
der that the variation of the far-ﬁeld of the telescope are
projected on the grating (i.e. without double scrambler).
WeremarkedthatthewayoftheRVvariationsdependson
exteriororinteriorvignetting(Fig.2).
3.3 Optical pathsimulations
WesimulatedtheopticalpathintheSOPHIEspectrograph.
We observed a displacement of the spectrum in function
of wavelength on the focal plane when the input beam at
the entrance of the spectrograph is center-illuminated or
center-darked,correspondingrespectivelywhenvignetti ng
external and internal part of the pupil in HE mode (cf.
Sect.3.2). Variation of the slit or the optical ﬁber illumi-
nationaredirectlytranslatedonthespectruminFig.3.We
observed that the shift is more signiﬁcant for an external
occultation. Because the e ﬀect is not symmetric along an
order and not monitored by the calibration lamp, the ﬁnal
computed RV vary. So, variations of the far-ﬁeld pattern
projectedontothegratingcanintroduceradial-velocitys hifts
at thedetectorloweringtheﬁnalprecisioninRV.
Fig. 3.Displacement of the position of a nine wavelength as a
function of a internal (green) or an external (red) occultat ion of
the entrance of the spectrograph onthe CCDdetector.
Fig.4.Whentheseeingisgood,thetelescopeimageislesswide.
With the double scrambler in HR mode, near ﬁeld becomes far-
ﬁeldandisprojectedonthecollimatorattheentranceofthe spec-
trograph. Thepatterniscomparable tothat observed inHEwh en
vignetting telescope (Fig.2)
3.4 RVeffects due toseeingvariations
Variations of the far-ﬁeld of the input beam in HE mode
is equivalent to a variation of the telescope image in HR
mode,duetothedoublescrambler.Variationsinseeingin-
duce a variation of the input image as illustrate in Fig. 4.
Theinputbeamattheentranceofthespectrographiscenter-
illuminated(externaloccultation)whenatargetisobserv ed
with a good seeing in HR mode. The previous tests and
simulations explain a systematic e ﬀect observedwith SO-
PHIE named as ”seeing e ﬀect”. For a sample of stars ob-
servedathighsignaltonoiseratio(SNR)inHRmode,we
observedadecreaseinRVcorrelatedwithanestimationof
seeing. The value of the seeing is not monitored with SO-
PHIE.We estimatedit with calculatingthe relativeﬂuxby
unitofexposuretime :
S=SNR2
Texp10−MV/2.5(1)
with SNR, the signal to noise ratio of the spectra, T expthe
time exposure of the measurement, M Vthe visual magni-
tude of the target. The seeing decrease when the seeing
estimation Sincrease. With a lower seeing, the input im-
age is smaller than the ﬁber width, and as shown in theEPJWeb ofConferences
Seeing Estimation [arb.unit]
Fig. 5.Radial-velocity measurements as a function of a seeing
index (cf. text). The seeing decrease when the seeing estima tion
Sincrease. As the seeingis lower,the RV decreases.
simulations,inducedavariationofthefarﬁeldinputinthe
spectrograph,due to the double scrambler. We expect and
observed a decrease of RV when the value of the seeing
decreaseasshowninFig.5.
Moreover,whentheinputimageissmallerthanthedi-
ameter of the ﬁber, we are more sensible to e ﬀect of guid-
ing and centering system. The guiding and centering sys-
tem may inducedvariationof the position of the inputim-
ageontheslit ortheentranceoftheﬁber,andsointroduce
RV variations. These RV variation are quite random, and
addsomenoise.
Whereas the seeing e ﬀect is directly related to the op-
ticalpathinthespectrograph,it maybequantiﬁed.We are
modeling this variations with our data in order to remove
thisnoisewitha softwaretool.
We note that the e ﬀect on HARPS is expected to be
lower. The 1” width of the ﬁbers is smaller than the SO-
PHIEandroughlyequivalenttothetypicalseeingatLaSilla .
Furthemore the quality image provided by the 3.6-m tele-
scopeiscloseto0.7arcsec.Hence,HARPSislesssensible
tothevariationsofseeing.Moreover,theresolutionpower
of the instrument is better and then the incomplete radial
scramblinghasalowerimpactinRVasshowninSect.3.1.
FurthermoretheopticalaberrationsonHARPSaresmaller
thaninSOPHIE.
4 Perspectivesandconclusions
The CODEX experiment calls for a Doppler precision as
low as 1 cms−1. This work shows that the future instru-
ments need for better scrambling to reach this accuracy.
New types of ﬁbers for feeding the telescope or new dou-
ble scrambler are needed to improve the precision and to
minimize the noise due to variationsof the illuminationat
the entrance of the spectrograph. To remove the sphericalsymmetry of cylindrical ﬁbers, octagonal and square sec-
tionopticalﬁbersaretheninstudyatGeneva,OHP-LAM,
and ESO Garching. As ﬁrst results, very good scrambling
properties are observed in the near ﬁeld, whereas strange
patternsinfarﬁeldarenotwellunderstoodatthemoment.
Itneedsfutureteststoimprovethemeasurements,tostudy
its best used, on all the path or in a double scrambling
mode. SOPHIE is then going to be a bench test for the
futureinstruments.
We note that additional solution is being installed on
HARPS toreducetheguidingandcenteringlimitations.A
tip-tilt mirror generate small-amplitude and high frequen -
ciesvariationsin ordertoinducea spreadofthelight.
AnewguidingcameraisnowinoperationonSOPHIE
and allows a better guiding and centering and also allows
to monitorthe exactseeing.
References
1. Bouchy&ConnesA&A,1999,Volume136,193
2. Bouchy, F., Isambert, J., Lovis, C. Boisse, I. et al. EAS
PublicationsSeries , Volume37,2009,pp.247-253
3. Bouchy,F.,H´ ebrard,G.,Udry,S.,Delfosse,X.,Boisse,
I.etal. A&A,Volume505,2009,pp.853
4. Brown,T.M.1990,ASPC, 8,335B
5. Lovis,C.& Pepe,F. 2007,A&A,468,1115L
6. Hunter,T.D.&Ramsey,L.W. 1992,PASP, 104,1244
7. Mayor, M., Udry, S., Lovis, C. et al. 2009, A&A, 493,
639
8. Pasquini, L., Manescau, A., Avila, G. et al. 2009,
svlt.conf,411
9. Pasquini, L., Avila, G., Dekker, H. et al. 2008,
SPIE.7014E,51P
10. Pepe,F. &Lovis,C., Phys.Scr. T130,(2008)014007
11. Perruchot, S., Kohler, D., Bouchy, F. et al. 2008,
SPIE.7014E,17P
12. Wildi,F., Pepe,F., Lovis,C., Chazelas,B. et al. 2009,
SPIE.7440E,19W