arXiv:1001.0476v1  [physics.optics]  4 Jan 20101
Rotational sensitivityofthe“G-Pisa” gyrolaser
JacopoBelﬁ,Nicol `oBeverini,FilippoBosi,GiorgioCarelli,AngelaDiVirgil io,
EnricoMaccioni,Marco Pizzocaro
Abstract—G-Pisa is an experiment investigatingthe possibilityto o perate a high sensitivity laser gyroscope with area
less than 1m2for improving the performances of the mirrors suspensions o f the gravitational wave antenna Virgo.
The experimental set-up consists in a He-Ne ring laser with a 4 mirrors square cavity. The laser is pumped by an RF
discharge where the RF oscillator includes the laser plasma in order to reach a better stability. The contrast of the
Sagnacfringesistypicallyabove50%andastableregimehas beenreachedwiththelaseroperatingbothsinglemode
or multimode. The effect of hydrogen contamination on the la ser was also checked. A low-frequencysensitivity, below
1Hz, intherangeof 10−8(rad/s)/√
Hzhasbeenmeasured.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
LASER gyroscopes are devices sensitive to
inertial angular motion. They are based
on the Sagnac effect: in a closed cavity ro-
tating at angular velocity Ωthe two counter
propagating beams complete the path at dif-
ferent times. Different kinds of such devices
have been developed mainly for navigation.
They are only sensitive to angular velocity
and insensitive to translational velocity. We
distinguish between passive (ﬁber optic gyros)
and active (ring lasers) Sagnac interferometers.
Passive devices measure the phase shift be-
tween the two beams, while the active ones
measure the frequency difference, an inherently
more accurate measurement. Small ﬁber gyros
are typically used for navigation and have a
resolution of 10−8rad/s, while the large ring
laser gyros used in geophysics and geodesy
reach the level of 10−12rad/s. In the following
we will focus on active ring lasers and will call
them simply gyros. One application of large
gyros is the monitoring of the variations of the
Earth angular velocity vector. The orientation
with respect to the Earth axis is important since
•J. Belﬁ, N. Beverini G. Carelli, E. Maccioni and M. Pizzocaro are
with the Department of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, Universit` a di
Pisa, and CNISM unit` a di Pisa. E-mail: carelli@df.unipi.i t
•F. Bosi and A. Di Virgilio are with INFN sezione di Pisa.the induced signal is proportional to the scalar
product between the normal of the gyro area
and Earth axis, see equation 1. For horizontal
gyros the signal is zero at the equator and
maximum at the pole; at intermediate latitudes,
horizontal and vertical cavities work ﬁne. Up
to now the reached resolution, integrating the
signal for several hours, is 10−8of the Earth
rotation rate [1]–[5]. The Sagnac frequency, i.e.,
the beat signal between the two output beams,
is:
δφ= 4An·Ω/(λP)+φρ (1)
whereAandPare the area and the perime-
ter of the cavity respectively, λis the wave-
length of the laser beam, nis the normal vector
of the plane of the ring cavity and Ωis the
induced vector of rotation. φρis denoting addi-
tional, usually very small, contributions to the
Sagnac frequency due to non-reciprocal effects
in the laser cavity, such as Fresnel drag [6]. A
laser gyro can monitor with high accuracy the
orientation of the laboratory reference frame,
but our main interest is in extending its use
for improvements of Virgo, the gravitational
waves interferometric antenna [7], [8]. The ma-
jor draw-back in ring lasers is the lock-in be-
tween the two counter-propagating modes; in
large gyros the rate bias induced by the Earth
rotation is enough to avoid it. The large ring
laser gyros built by the joint ring laser working
group in New Zealand and Germany have2
sides of the order of several meters. “G” [9],
[10] located at the Geodetic Observatory in
Wettzell (Germany) is a monolithic square with
4 m sides, “UG2”, a rectangle with 40 m by
20 m sides, is the largest ring. In principle the
larger the area the better the sensitivity, but
the best gyro so far, is “G”, which is oper-
ating very close to the quantum limit (just a
factor 3 higher), and its measured noise power
spectrum is of the order of 10−11rad/s/√
Hz,
with a duty cycle close to 100%. The Allan
deviation has not shown any systematic effects
on a time scale of about 3 hours, and the sensor
drift is normally below 1.5 parts in 108of the
Earth rotation ( 1.1·10−12rad/s). The Allan
deviation goes down as the square root of time
up to 2.7 hours of averaging time, then goes up
for a while before it resumes the theoretically
expected downward trend.
2 SENSITIVITY LIMITS
In large gyros the shot noise of light gives the
fundamental limit to sensitivity:
Ωsn=c
2πKL/radicalBigg
hνµT
2P t(2)
wherecis the speed of light, Lthe side of
the square ring, hthe Plank Constant, νthe
frequency of the light, µthe total cavity losses,
Tthe transmittance, Pthe total transmitted
power,tthe observation time, and Kis the
scale factor of the instrument. In ﬁgure 1 the
shot noise is shown for various values of the
parameters µ,TandPand an observation time
of 1 s.
For the continuous line (good mirrors, but
not the best ones) µ= 40 ppm,T= 0.2ppm
andP= 10−8W, for the dotted line absorption
has been reduced to 4 ppm, and for the point-
dotted line the transmitted power has also been
increased to 10−7W (top quality mirrors). In
short, a device with Lbelow 1 m could rea-
sonably reach a sensitivity of 10−9rad/s/√
Hz,
while to reach 10−11rad/s/√
Hzdevices larger
than 2 m are required. The lower limits to
the size of a gyrolaser are given by the
backscattering-induced frequency pulling and
lock-in. As a rule, for a given set of mirrors, it
is always possible to build a ring large enough00.511.522.533.544.555.566.577.588.599.51010−1210−1110−1010−910−8
Size of the square cavity  (m)Shot noise [(rad/s)/Hz1/2]
Fig. 1. Shot noise limit as a function of the
square cavity side. The three different traces
correspond to sets of mirrors of different quality
(seethetext).
that the bias induced by the Earth rotation is
large enough to avoid lock-in. The parameter
which sets the magnitude of the mode pulling
is the lock-in threshold frequency l, where
l≈csλ/(πdP), wherecis the speed of light,
sis the fraction of the laser ﬁeld amplitude
which is scattered by each mirror, λis the
laser wavelength, dis the beam waist and P
is the ring perimeter. In ﬁgure 2 the dashed
lines show the lock-in limit as a function of
the side of a square ring, for a beam waist of
0.5 mm and different values of of the scattering
coefﬁcient s. The continuous line shows the
Sagnac frequency given by the Earth rotation
for a device horizontally located at latitude 43◦
as a function of the ring size.
3 EXPERIMENTAL SET -UP
G-Pisa is a square cavity 5.60 m in perimeter
and 1.96 m2in area. The mechanical design
is ﬂexible and each side of the square can be
scaled from 1.40 m down to 0.90 m with minor
changes. The mechanical system is mounted
onto an optical table and has a stainless steel
modular structure: 4 boxes, located at the cor-
ner of the square and containing the mirrors
holders inside, are connected by tubes, so to
form a ring vacuum chamber with a total
volume of about 5·10−3m3. The vacuum3
10−110010110−1100101102103
Size of the square cavity (m)Frequency (Hz)
Fig. 2. Continuous line shows the Sagnac fre-
quency, the three dashed lines show the lock-
in threshold frequency for three different set of
mirrors (s=10−4, 5·10−4and 10−3). Highlighted
intersections represent the G-Pisacase.
chamber, is entirely ﬁlled with a mixture of
He and a 50% isotopic mixture of20Ne and
22Ne. The total pressure of the gas mixture is
set to 560 Pa with a partial pressure of Neon
of 20 Pa. In the center of one of the tubes
there is a pyrex insertion, a capillary with 4
mm internal diameter, approximately 15 cm
long, which is the discharge tube. While the
discharge in the laser medium of “G” and ana-
log systems is excited by an RF source, where
two coils couple the RF oscillator to the gas,
in our system we choose a capacitive coupling.
Two halves of a copper cylinder are used as
electrodes and are part of the resonant circuit
of the RF source. The laser medium in this way
is included in the active circuit and the ﬂuctu-
ations in the plasma density do not affect the
coupling of the RF source to the discharge, but
only the oscillator frequency, about 115 MHz.
This kind of discharge provides a very good
passive stability and made possible to regulate
the laser output power very close to the laser
threshold since the ﬁrst runs. The discharge is
5 cm long, but different lengths will be tested
in the next months to minimize the effect of
plasma intensity ﬂuctuations around the laser
threshold. The discharge tube has four micro-
metric screws used to align the pyrex capillarywith the mirrors and the optical cavity.
Four spherical mirrors with 6 m radius cur-
vature were chosen for the resonator, and two
micro-metric lever arms acting on the tilts
of each mirror, make it possible a ﬁne tun-
ing of the cavity alignment. Mirrors reﬂectiv-
ity is optimized for the emission line around
632.8 nm. The free spectral range of the cav-
ity is 53.6 MHz, the horizontal beam waist
is 0.68 mm, the sagittal beam waist 0.56 mm
and the intra-cavity ring-down time is 20 µs.
In order to achieve long term stability of the
perimeter the laser gyro optical frequency will
be locked to a reference laser. This will involve
the measurement of the radio frequency beat
note between the gyrolaser output and the
reference laser: for such application the capaci-
tive coupling will introduce less noise than the
inductive one. The two outputs (clockwise and
counter-clockwise sense of circulation) from
one cavity mirror are combined by means of a
50% intensity beam splitter and detected by a
photodiode. The photodiode current is voltage
converted by a trans-impedance stage with a
gain of109and 1 ms rise time. The two single
beam outputs are also monitored by means of
two ﬁber-coupled photomultipliers. The laser
modal structure has been detected injecting the
output beams in a high ﬁnesse linear cavity.
The signals are acquired and analyzed off-line.
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
When the laser output power is not higher
than few tens nW only one longitudinal mode
(TEM00) in both sense of propagation is above
the laser threshold. The beat note at the ex-
pected Sagnac frequency (around 111.1 Hz) can
be observed both in the interference between
the two counter-rotating beams and in the
single beam. Usually both beams lase in the
same longitudinal mode, i.e., with the same
mode number. This behavior is the standard
operation for a ring laser gyro, and the beat
note between the two counter-rotating waves
is the Sagnac frequency at the expected value.
Unfortunately, counter-propagating beams can
lase on different longitudinal modes and one
gets the so called split-mode regime [11]. Their
separation is 53.6 MHz, the free spectral range4
of the gyro laser. Sagnac signal is lost with split
modes. The Sagnac signal in the beat note be-
tween the two split counter-propagating modes
still exists, of course, but is shifted around
53.6 MHz. The ﬁrst cause of split in G-Pisa
is mode hopping due to thermal expansion
of the cavity. In the not controlled conditions
of our laboratory, the typical time between
one mode jump and the other could range
between 5 min to 15 min. Split modes persist
usually for some minutes, until both beams
return on the same longitudinal mode and then
the standard operation and Sagnac signal are
recovered. When the gyrolaser operates close
to threshold, as stated before, just one optical
mode for each direction propagates inside the
cavity, if the power increases slightly we obtain
multimode operation, at higher power many
different longitudinal modes are excited in both
directions and the behavior of the gyroscope
becomes unstable. Several measurements were
done to learn about the behavior of the ring
laser as a function of power and to investigate
multimodal operation of the cavity. During the
standard operation, G-Pisa gyro shows a stable
Sagnac signal, even with three or four modes in
each direction. This evidence strongly suggests
that modes are apparently mode-locked, or,
there is a ﬁxed phase relation between different
modes, and this ﬁxed phase is the same in both
directions. Contrast of the Sagnac signal seems
uncorrelated to intensity of the laser beam or
number of modes. Figure 3 shows an example,
with number of modes ranging between one
to four (ﬂuctuations are probably due to hys-
teresis effects and are not strictly reproducible).
From 1 up to 1.1 normalized voltage it has been
checked that the laser operates in monomode.
We noted that the gyro sometimes does not
mode lock. This happens especially after power
changes and for particular distributions of the
cavity modes under the gain curve. These last
aspects deserve further investigation in the
next future.
The rotational sensitivity is obtained by re-
constructing the phase of the beat note, and
differentiating it, in order to obtain the angular
velocity. The mean value of this signal gives the
Earth rotational speed, which is usually sub-
tracted. The power spectrum of the signal gives
Fig. 3. Contrast of the Sagnac fringes in func-
tion of the discharge root mean square voltage
normalized tothe threshold value.
10−210−110010110210−1010−910−810−710−610−510−4
HzRad/sec/sqrt(Hz)
  
Fig. 4. Comparison between the best low-
frequency measurements. Gray spectrum and
black spectrum refer respectively to the case
of rigid and passively air-damped optical table.
The horizontal line is the shot noise, the trans-
verse lines represent the minimal and typical
request for Virgo.
the upper limit to the low frequency sensitivity,
which is the relevant parameter for the pos-
sible improvements of the gravitational waves
interferometer suspension. A typical spectrum
is reported in ﬁg. 4. The horizontal line is the
shot noise limit, the two transverse lines are the
minimal and typical requirements for the Virgo
suspensions [12].
Fig. 5 shows the behavior of the intensity
of clock wise and anti-clock wise beams, mea-5
Fig.5. Clockwiseandcounter-clockwisebeams
in function of the voltage applied to the dis-
charge
sured increasing (up) and decreasing (down)
the voltage of the discharge.
It is possible to see that the two modes have
different threshold and different slopes. This
put in evidence a slight intrinsic asymmetry in
the laser. By means of a simultaneous measure-
ment of rotational noise, performed with the G-
Pisa gyrolaser, and translational noise obtained
by a three axial linear accelerometer, it was
possible to set an upper limit to the correlation
between detected rotations and translations to
a level of 0.5 %. Details of such analysis can
be found in [7]. Hydrogen contamination is
a matter of concern in our apparatus, since
light absorption from hydrogen can prevent
laser action. Hydrogen is released from the
steel vacuum tubes and from the pyrex close to
the discharge. Fig. 6 shows the concentration
of Hydrogen as a function of time. G-Pisa
can now run for only three weeks before the
gas mixture must be changed. This level of
contamination will be reduced by introducing
some getters inside the chamber and by baking
the vacuum chamber before each gas reﬁlling.
5 CONCLUSIONS
Our device can run continuously, interruptions
are due to thermal expansion induced mode
jumps (split mode regime), which makes the
instrument blind for few minutes. This prob-
lem will be resolved by stabilizing the perime-
Fig.6. Hydrogencontaminationasafunctionof
time
ter of the ring by means of piezoelectric ac-
tuated mirror. We characterized the different
regimes of operation of the gyroscope and
proved the possibility of increased power, mul-
timode operations. The low frequency mea-
sured power spectrum (below 1 Hz) is around
10−8(rad/s)/√
Hz, which looks like to be real
motion. The system sensitivity is close to the
limit needed to control the tilt of the suspen-
sions of Virgo.
REFERENCES
[1] G. E. Stedman, “Ring-laser tests of fundamental physics
and geophysics,” Rep. Prog. Phys. , vol. 60, pages 615–688,
1997.
[2] K. U. Schreiber, T. Kl ¨ ugel and G. E. Stedman,“ Earth tide
and tilt detection by a ring laser gyroscope,” J. Geophys.
Res. Solid Earth , vol. 108, 2003.
[3] K. U. Schreiber, A. Velikoseltsev, M. Rothacher. T. Kl ¨ u gel,
G. E. Stedman and D. Wiltshire, “Direct measurement of
diurnal polar motion by ring laser gyroscopes,” J. Geophys.
Res. Solid Earth , vol. 109, B06405, 2004.
[4] C.H. Rowe, U.K. Schreiber, S.J. Cooper, B.T. King, M.
Poulton and G.E. Stedman, “Design and operation of a
very large ring laser gyroscope,” Appl. Opt. , vol. 38, pages
2516–2523, 1999.
[5] R.W. Dunn, D.E. Shabalin, R.J. Thirkettle, G.J. MacDona ld,
G.E. Stedman and K.U. Schreiber, “Design and Initial
Operation of a 367 m2Rectangular Ring Laser,” Appl. Opt. ,
vol. 41 (9), pages 1685–1688, 2002.
[6] F. Aronowitz, in “Laser applications“, vol. 1 M. Ross ed. ,
Academic Press, New York 1971.
[7] A. Di Virgilio et al., “The G-Pisa gyrolaser after 1 year o f
operation and considerations about its use to improve the
Virgo IP control”, Virgo note (to be published).
[8] I. Fiori, S. Braccini, F. Travasso and A. Vicer´ e “Siesta
simulation of NE suspension tower Virgo note”, VIR-NOT-
PIS-1390-285, 2004.6
[9] K.U. Schreiber, A Velikoseltsev, Kl ¨ ugel T., G.E. Stedm an
and W. Schl ¨ uter, “Advances in the Stabilisation of Large
Ring Laser Gyroscopes,” Proceedings of the Symposium Gyro
Technology , Univ. of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, 2001.
[10] K. U. Schreiber, T. Kl ¨ ugel, G. E. Stedman, and W. Schl ¨ u ter,
“Stabilitaetsbetrachtungen f ¨ ur grossereinglaser,” DGK Mit-
teilungen Rehie A., Heft 118, pages 156–158, 2002.
[11] R. B. Hurst, R. W. Dunn, K. U. Schreiber, R. J. Thirkettle ,
and G. K. MacDonald, “ Mode behavior in ultralarge ring
lasers,” Appl. Opt. 43, 2337, 2004.
[12] S. Braccini et al.“ Measurement of the seismic attenua-
tion performance of the VIRGO Superattenuator”, Astrop.
Phys. ,vol. 23, pages 557–565, 2005.