arXiv:1001.0810v1  [astro-ph.CO]  6 Jan 2010Relaxing constraints on dark matter annihilation
Leonid Chuzhoy
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, The University o f Chicago, 5640 S. Ellis, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA; chuzhoy@oddjob.uchicago.edu
ABSTRACT
The relic abundance of thermal dark matter particles is generally as sumed to be inversely
proportional to their annihilation rate, which is therefore constra ined by the present matter
density,∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright ∼10−26Ω−1
dmcm3·sec−1. Here we point out that much lower values of ∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright
arepossibleforheavydarkmattercandidates( mX/greaterorsimilar10TeV)thatcoupletootherparticlespecies
through the electroweak force. With heavy dark matter particles present the early universe may
evolveaccordingtothefollowingscenario. Afteranearlyentryinto matter-dominatedphase,dark
matter particles form self-gravitating microhalos. Collisional intera ction between dark matter
particles and the surroundingradiation ﬁeld eventually leads to micro halosgravothermalcollapse
and annihilation of most dark matter particles. For suﬃciently heavy dark matter candidates
(mX/greaterorsimilar10 TeV) the universe can return to radiation-dominated phase bef ore the nucleosynthesis
and thereafter follow the ”standard” scenario.
Subject headings: cosmology: theory – early universe
1. Introduction
While there is a strong evidence for the ex-
istence of non-baryonic dark matter, little is
known about its origins. In the currently popu-
lar scenario, dark matter particles and antipar-
ticles start in thermal equilibrium with radia-
tion. When temperature drops below the par-
ticle mass, mX, their comoving density begins an
exponential fall until the annihilation time-scale,
tann= (nX∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright)−1, becomes larger than the
age of the Universe. From this point the comoving
density of dark matter particles is assumed frozen.
Forthe relicabundance ofdarkmatter particlesto
be consistent with the present value of Ω dmtheir
annihilation rate at the time of freeze-out must
equal (Kolb & Turner 1989)
∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright ∼3·10−26cm3·sec−1.(1)
Unless dark matter is of non-thermal origin
(Chung, Kolb & Riotto 1998), lower values of
∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketrightwould overclose the universe and there-
fore can be excluded.
If dark matter particles interact through any
known force, during the decoupling epoch, whenT∼mX, their annihilation cross-section can not
exceedσann/lessorsimilarα/T2∼α/m2
X. Using this fact,
Griest & Kamionkowski (1990) obtained from (1)
anupperlimitonthemassofdarkmatterparticles
mX/lessorsimilar300 TeV. (2)
However, in this paper we point out that dark
matter candidates with higher mass and lower an-
nihilation cross-section are not necessarily incon-
sistent with the present value of Ω dm. Unlike the
standard model, which assumes the dark matter
comoving density freezes out soon after the tem-
peratureoftheUniversedropsbelow mX, weshow
that it is possible for it to drop again later, after
dark matter particles form virialized halos.
2. Dark matter annihilation inside halos
Unlike the standard model, where the matter
becomes dominant only around z∼104, in a Uni-
verse with low ∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketrightand high mXthe initial
transition to matter domination happens much
earlier. Consequently the growth of density per-
turbations and the formation of the ﬁrst gravita-
1tionally bound halos would be likewise shifted to
a much earlier epoch.
The collapse of dark matter particles into halos
gives a strong boost to the dark matter annihi-
lation rate. Whereas previously the time-scale for
particleannihilationwasincreasingfasterthanthe
age of the Universe, freeze-out of the local density
inside gravitationally bound halos causes the re-
versal of this trend. Once the Hubble time begins
to catch up with the annihilation time-scale, the
dark matter comoving density is no longer con-
stant.
Subsequent evolution of the Universe depends
on the nature of the dark matter particles. For
purely collisionless dark matter it can be shown
(see Appendix A) that the comoving matter den-
sity eventually approaches an asymptote, ρm(1+
z)−3∝t−1/4. This moderate rate of decline turns
out to be insuﬃcient for the Universe to return to
radiation dominated phase before the nucleosyn-
thesis. However, annihilation inside halos can be
greatly sped up if dark matter particles interact
with the surrounding radiation (made up mostly
of relativistic quarks and leptons).
At present weakly interacting massive parti-
cles (WIMPs) are the most popular candidates
for the role of dark matter. The collisional cou-
pling between WIMPs and other species is usu-
ally assumed to be negligible. At our epoch this
assumption is generally correct, as the Universe
temperature is far below the mass scale of W±
andZbosonswhich mediate the weakforce. How-
ever, in the early universe, when T/greaterorsimilar300 GeV,
the coupling becomes very eﬃcient. At high tem-
peratures WIMPs scattering cross-section rises to
σelastic∼α2/T2, making the ratio between the
relaxation time and the age of the Universe
τrel
tHubble∼mX+T
α2mPl, (3)
wheremPlis the Planck mass. For mX/lessorsimilar1013
TeV and 0 .1/lessorsimilarT/lessorsimilar1013TeV this ratio drops
below unity, implying that WIMPs kinetic energy
is tightly coupled to the radiation.
Collisional coupling between dark matter and
radiation has a two-fold eﬀect on the formation
of self-gravitating dark matter halos, which is ex-
pected to begin after the matter-radiation equal-
ity. On small scales, Tvirial< Tγ, the energy
transfer from radiation to dark matter preventsthecollapseofthelow-masshalos. Onlargescales,
Tvirial/greaterorsimilarTγ, the eﬀect is the opposite. Since
self-gravitating objects have negative heat capac-
ity, the energy loss to the surrounding radiation
ﬁeld would lead dark matter particles to collapse
deeper into the gravitational well, thereby raising
the virial temperature. Thus the continuous en-
ergy loss to the background radiation results in a
gravothermal collapse.1
The time-scale for particle diﬀusion in self-
gravitating objects, which in our case also sets the
time-scale for gravothermal collapse of larger ha-
los, is
τcoll∼∝angbracketleftσelv∝angbracketright
Gmx, (4)
whereσel∼α2/T2is the scattering cross-section
for the weakly interacting particles. If, as gener-
ally predicted by the inﬂation models, the density
perturbation spectrum is scale-invariant, then the
velocity dispersion of dark matter particles in ha-
los with a size above the damping scales should
be of order v∼0.1cand the virial temperature
T∼0.01mX. Thus in large halos the gravother-
mal collapse proceeds on a timescale
τcoll∼103/parenleftBigmX
1TeV/parenrightBig−3
sec. (5)
If halos consist equally of dark matter particles
and anti-particles (i.e. there is no dark matter
asymmetry) at some point during the gravother-
mal collapsenearlyall ofthem mayannihilate into
radiation. Provided the mass of the particle is
greater than ∼10 TeV, halos collapse and the
resulting conversion of dark matter to radiation
would end before nucleosynthesis and thereafter
the evolution of the Universe can proceed accord-
ing to the ”standard” scenario.
3. Discussion
Itfollowsfromourscenariothattheexistenceof
stable particles with high mass and low annihila-
tion cross-section does not violate the constraints
on the present matter density. If several species of
1During the epoch of reionization, 6 /lessorsimilarz/lessorsimilar20, inverse
Compton scatterings between electrons and the CMB pho-
tons have a similareﬀect on baryonic halos. However, there
the gravothermal collapse is generally avoided either by en -
ergy injection from stars and miniquasars or by hydrogen
recombination, which depletes the free electron abundance .
2such particles existed in the early universe, each
could have been eliminated in separate periods of
matter domination followed by return to radiation
domination.
To satisfy the constraints on abundance of the
light elements the last reversal to radiation dom-
ination must have happened prior to the nucle-
osynthesis. Nevertheless it is possible for the tran-
sitional matter dominated phase to leave its im-
print on the presently observed universe. Besides
leaving a small remnant of heavy particles, which
at present compose the dark matter, the transi-
tional matter dominated phase might aﬀect later
universe by creating a population of primordial
black holes and baryon asymmetry.
The violation of CP-symmetry in the early uni-
verse (Sakharov 1967) makes it natural to expect
a small diﬀerential between the coupling strengths
of particles and anti-particles. Inside collapsing
halos the drag force produced on dark matter
particles through elastic scatterings with the es-
caping radiation may be diﬀerent from the force
on dark matter anti-particles. As a result, spa-
tial segregation of dark matter particles and anti-
particles would be produced. Similarly, a dif-
ferential drag by the infalling dark matter par-
ticles on the outﬂowing quarks and anti-quarks
(or leptons and anti-leptons) would produce lo-
cal over/underabundancesof baryons and leptons.
During halos gravothermal collapse the existence
of such segregation would make it impossible for
the entirehalo to annihilate intoradiation. There-
fore the collapse of particles (or anti-particles)
dominating at the halo center should lead to the
formation of a black hole.
Since black holes do not conserve baryon num-
bers (Hawking 1974; Zeldovich 1976; Carr 1976),
formation of a central black hole would convert a
local particle asymmetry into a global one. De-
pending on their initial mass, these primordial
black holes may have evaporated long before the
present epoch, possibly further amplifying the
matter-antimatterasymmetryin the process(Dol-
gov 1982). Alternatively, if their mass was suﬃ-
ciently large, signiﬁcant population of primordial
black holes may still be found in our Universe.
TheauthorthanksE.W.Kolb,M.S.TurnerandM. Beltran for stimulating discussions.
Appendix A: Annihilation of collisionless
particles in virialized halos
We consider the evolution of matter den-
sity ﬁeld, assuming the annihilation cross-section
scales as ∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright ∝v−xat non-relativistic veloci-
ties. While it is common to assume x= 0, many
new particle candidates with x= 1 have been
proposed (e.g. Hisano et al. 2004; Profumo 2005;
Lattanzi & Silk 2008). Here we shall assume that
xcan take any value in the physically plausible
range 0≤x <2.
After decoupling from radiation matter den-
sity drops to a point when the annihilation time-
scale,tann= (nx∝angbracketleftσannv∝angbracketright)−1, becomes longer than
the Hubble time, so that the comoving density is
frozen. As long as the density ﬁeld remains nearly
homogeneous with the density and velocity dis-
persion falling respectively as a−3anda−2with
the increasing scale factor, a,tann/tHubblecontin-
ues to rise. However, this trend is reversed af-
ter matter collapses into halos. Inside an isolated
gravitationally bound halos both the local density
and velocity dispersion remain roughly constant,
freezing the growth of tannuntil it becomes com-
parable with tHubble. At this point a halo would
start losing mass at a signiﬁcant rate via parti-
cle annihilation. The subsequent halo evolution of
can be described as following.
The mass loss from particle annihilation and
the resulting decrease of binding energy would
cause the halo to expand, so that the annihila-
tion time-scale tracks the age of the halo. Because
the dynamic time is much shorter than tHubble,
the halo always remains close to dynamical equi-
librium. Since the gravitational binding energy is
proportional to Eg∝M2/R, whereMandRare
the total massandthe radiusofthe halo, changing
the mass and radius by dManddRrespectively,
changesEgby
dEg=Eg/parenleftbigg
2dM
M−dR
R/parenrightbigg
. (6)
The change of halo kinetic energy, Ek, in the an-
nihilation process depends on the velocity depen-
dence of σannand the particle velocity distribu-
tion. Assuming Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution,
we ﬁnd that the average kinetic energy of an an-
3nihilating particle is (1 −x/2)(mX/angbracketleftbig
v2/angbracketrightbig
/2), where/radicalbig
∝angbracketleftv2∝angbracketrightis the local velocity dispersion. Thus
dEk
Ek=/parenleftBig
1−x
2/parenrightBigdM
M. (7)
Combining the virial theorem, Eg=−2Ek, with
equations (6) and (7), we ﬁnd that the radius
of the halo increases with the falling mass as
R∝M−1+x/2. Further, by using the scalings
ρ∝M/R3,v∝/radicalbig
M/Rand (ρv−x)∝t−1, we
ﬁnd that the total mass of the halo falls with time
asM∝tµ,µ=−4/(16+2x−x2). For the entire
range 0≤x <2,µis conﬁned to a narrow range
−0.25≤x <−0.235.
Modeling the Universe as an ensemble of iso-
lated halos, we can follow the global evolution of
matter and radiation density ﬁelds
d2a
adt2=−4πG
3(ρm+2ργ),(8)
dρm
dt=−/parenleftbigg
3da
adt−µ
t/parenrightbigg
ρm,(9)
dργ
dt=−4da
adt−µ
tρm, (10)
whereργandρmare respectively, the mean densi-
ties ofradiation and matter and ais the expansion
factor. Solving the equations, we ﬁnd the asymp-
totic solutions
a∝t(2+µ)/3, (11)
ρm=2+5µ+2µ2
12πGt2, ργ=−(2+µ)µ
8πGt2,(12)
ρm
ργ=−2(1+2µ)
3µ. (13)
Forµ≈ −1/4 we get Ω m≈4/7 and Ω γ≈3/7.
REFERENCES
Carr B.J. 1976, ApJ, 206, 8
ChungD. J.H., KolbE.W., RiottoA. 1998,Phys.
Rev. Lett. 81, 4048
Dolgov A.D. 1992, Phys. Rept. 222, 309Griest K., Kamionkowski M. 1990, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 64, 615
Hawking S. W. 1974, Nature 248, 30
Hisano J., Matsumoto S., & Nojiri M. M. 2004,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 031303
Kolb E.W., Turner M.S., ”The Early Eniverse”
(Addison-Wesley, Redwood City)
Lattanzi M., & Silk J. 2009, Phys. Rev. D., 79,
3523
Profumo S., 2005, Phys. Rev. D 72, 103521
Sakharov A.D. 1967, JETP, 5, 24
Zeldovich Ya. B., 1976, JETP Lett. 24, 25
This 2-column preprint was prepared with the AAS L ATEX
macros v5.2.
4