arXiv:1001.0305v1  [astro-ph.IM]  2 Jan 2010Preliminary Astrometric Results from Kepler
David G. Monet
U. S. Naval Observatory, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86001
Jon M. Jenkins
SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA 94043
Edward Dunham
Lowell Observatory, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86001
Stephen T. Bryson
NASA/Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
Ronald L. Gilliland
Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, MD 21218
David W. Latham
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge MA 021 38
William J. Borucki
NASA/Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
and
David G. Koch
NASA/Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
Received ; accepted– 2 –
ABSTRACT
Although not designed as an astrometric instrument, Kepleris expected to
produce astrometric results of a quality appropriate to support m any of the
astrophysical investigations enabled by its photometric results. O n the basis of
data collected during the ﬁrst few months of operation, the astro metric precision
for a single 30 minute measure appears to be better than 4 milliarcsec onds (0.001
pixel). Solutions for stellar parallax andproper motions await more ob servations,
but the analysis of the astrometric residuals from a local solution in t he vicinity
of a star have already proved to be an important tool in the proces s of conﬁrming
the hypothesis of a planetary transit.
Subject headings: astrometry — stars: fundamental parameters– 3 –
1. Introduction
The measurement of astrometric parameters, particularly the pa rallax, for Keplerstars
is a critical component of computing the physical values for various stellar parameters
using the relative values that are computed from the photometric a nalysis. If the Kepler
data can be shown to have the necessary astrometric accuracy, then such a conversion can
be included in the processing for most if not all Keplerstars. Although the discussion of
Keplerastrometric accuracy must await more data and modeling, the very high precision
ofKeplerpositions is already a powerful tool for understanding the photom etric variations
of stars and the possible presence of planetary companions. Deta iled discussions of the
Keplerspacecraft and mission are presented by Borucki et al. (2010) an d Koch et al.
(2010). A short overview for the astrometric discussion is the follo wing. The Schmidt
telescope has a 1.4-m primary and a 0.95-m corrector, and the phot ometer is a mosaic of
42 charge coupled devices (CCDs). The boresight of the telescope remains constant for
the mission, but the spacecraft rolls 90 degrees every three mont hs. Due to restrictions in
memory and bandwidth, only the pixels associated with the target st ars are sent to the
ground for processing. Target stars are deﬁned by software, a nd pixels not associated with
targets are saved only infrequently. The basic integration time is 6.0 2 seconds, and the long
cadence (LC) sequence (Jenkins et al. 2010) co-adds the target pixels for 29.4 minutes. The
co-added pixel data are sent to the ground every month for proc essing and analysis. This
strategy enables the extremely high signal-to-noise (SNR) observ ations needed to achieve
the planetary detection mission.
To obtain the large ﬁeld of view, the image sampling is very coarse comp ared to
other astrometric assets. The Pixel Response Function (PRF) is d escribed in great detail
by Bryson et al. (2010), but a quick summary is as follows. The images contain three
components, a sharp spike in the middle that comes from optical diﬀr action (about 0.1– 4 –
arcsecond), a wider component with a characteristic size of 5 or 6 a rcseconds set primarily
by mechanical alignment tolerances of the CCD mosaic, and a much br oader scattering
proﬁle. The intermediate component of the image proﬁle produces t he majority of the
astrometric signal, and it contains about 70% of the light. The 43 day s of data available so
far1have shown a remarkable astrometric precision, but the demonstr ation of astrometric
accuracy is still a work in progress. Even if the centroiding process was fully understood,
the short interval of available data precludes the lifting of the dege neracies between eﬀects
of proper motion, parallax, and velocity aberration. No measured a strometric parameters
are given here. Indeed, the entire range of observed image motion is about 0.2 pixels, and
this is dominated by the spacecraft guiding precision.
Various authors, including King (1983) and Kaiser et al. (2000), hav e developed
theoretical expectations for the astrometric precision of an imag e. A simple approximation
is
precision =FWHM/ (2∗SNR) (1)
where FWHM is the image full width at half maximum, and SNR is the photo metric
signal-to-noise ratio of that star image. The diﬀerences in the theo retical derivations concern
the exact value for which the approximate value of 2 is used above. T he observational
conﬁrmation of this relationship has yet to be done, but essentially a ll ground- and
space-based astrometric studies have demonstrated the validity of the scaling of this
relationship. Improved astrometric precision is obtained for smaller image FWHM, higher
SNR, or both assuming that adequate image sampling is available.
Kepleroperates in a heretofore unstudied astrometric domain. The pixels are very
1As described more fully by Caldwell at al. (2010), the spacecraft da ta are grouped by
observing quarters as deﬁned by the mandatory rolls of the space craft itself. So far, data
from Quarters 0 and 1 are available on the ground.– 5 –
large, 3.98 arcseconds, as compared to other ground- and space -based astrometric assets,
and the observed FWHM is approximately 5 to 6 arcseconds and depe nds on the location
in the ﬁeld of view. (See Bryson et al. (2010) for further discussion and examples.) The
eﬀects of undersampled image components are not captured by Eq . 1. However, Kepler
was designed for extremely high SNR observations. The well capacit y of the 27-micron
CCD pixels is more than a million electrons, and most of the stars are br ight. As more
fully discussed by Caldwell at al. (2010), the onset of saturation in t he basic 6.02 second
integration cycle is near the magnitude Kp= 11.3.2A single LC co-addition produces a
SNR of about 10,000 for an bright, unsaturated, uncrowded star . There is no atmosphere to
degrade the image quality, and the ﬂux is so large that eﬀects such a s sensor readout noise
and dark current are unimportant for the brightest 2-3 magnitud es of unsaturated stars.
2. Preliminary Astrometric Investigations
The astrometric processing of Keplerdata is conceptually no diﬀerent than the
traditional diﬀerential astrometric process of data from other g round- and space-based
assets. There is no need to worry about the actual coordinates ( i.e., J2000 RA and Dec)
of the stars. Essentially all Keplerstars are in the 2MASS catalog (Skrutskie et al. 2006),
and most are in the UCAC-2 catalog (Zacharias, et al. 2004). Rathe r, the goal of the
analysis is to measure the small changes in position associated with pr oper motion, parallax,
perturbations from unseen companions, and blending with photome trically variable stars.
The current astrometric pipeline involves three distinct steps: cen troids are computed from
2TheKeplermagnitude Kpincludes a very wide passband and is similar to an astronom-
icalRmagnitude in central wavelength.– 6 –
the pixel data, transformations are computed from each channe l3of each LC co-addition
into an intermediate coordinate system, and solutions for each sta r are computed using the
intermediate coordinates and terms such as time, parallax factor, etc. Steps two and three
are iterated a few times, and convergence is quite rapid. Details of e ach of these steps are
presented in the following subsections.
2.1. Centroids
Most modern centroiding algorithms fall into three classes: moment analysis, ﬁts
to analytic functions, and ﬁts to the instrumental point spread fu nction (PSF). So far,
various algorithms from the ﬁrst two classes have been implemented and tested. The data
processing pipeline of the Science Operations Center (SOC; Jenkins et al. (2010)) compute
ﬂux-weighted means for all stars and Gaussian ﬁts and PSF ﬁts for a few stars. PSF ﬁtting
of all stars remains a task for the future. In a separate eﬀort, s everal other centroiding
algorithms based on ﬁtting the images to analytic functions have bee n evaluated, and
centroids for all stars have been computed for many of these. Th e choice of centroiding
algorithm requires special attention because of the properties of theKeplerimages discussed
above. The eﬀect of the undersampled components of the images h as not been fully
evaluated, and the number of pixels for each star has been minimized by the Optimal
Aperture algorithm (Bryson et al. 2010) so that the maximum numbe r of stars can be
transmitted in the ﬁxed spacecraft bandwidth. Because the best astrometric centroiding
algorithm has not been identiﬁed yet, analysis is proceeding with para llel tracks to evaluate
3As described more fully by Jenkins et al. (2010), each CCD is split into t wo channels by
the ﬂight electronics. The astrometric veriﬁcation of the stability b etween the two channels
of a single CCD has yet to be performed.– 7 –
a few of the most promising algorithms.
2.2. Transformation Coeﬃcients
The current astrometric pipeline supports two diﬀerent coordinat e systems. For some
investigations, working in a sky-based system seems appropriate. The tangent point is
taken to be the nominal Keplerboresight ( α= 19h22m40s,δ= +44◦30′, J2000) and a simple
tangent plane projection is computed from the nominal positions of the stars listed in the
KeplerInput Catalog (KIC).4In this coordinate system, eﬀects such as diﬀerential velocity
aberration and parallax are easy to visualize. For other investigatio ns, a channel-based
coordinate system seems appropriate, and eﬀects arising from th e structure and behavior of
CCD pixels are easier to visualize. Of particular importance are eﬀect s based on where the
star falls with respect to the pixel grid, a term called “pixel phase”. In either coordinate
system, a separate set of transformation coeﬃcients is compute d for the measures from each
channel for each cadence. A sample of 1000 known distant giant st ars was included in the
Keplerstar list, and are used during the ﬁrst iteration to generate a tran sformed coordinate
system that is as close to inertial as possible.
2.3. Astrometric Coeﬃcients
The tasks of computing the centroids and the transformation coe ﬃcients for the Kepler
data are similar to their counterparts for traditional ground- and space-based assets. It
is the modeling of the measured positions for each star that involves special attention,
and this ﬂows from the extremely high SNR of the data. The simplest s olutions based on
4http://archive.stsci.edu/kepler/kepler fov/search.php– 8 –
computing only the mean positions from the data currently available s how an astrometric
precision near 20 milliarcseconds (about 0.005 pixels). This value and t hose presented below
refer to the uncertainty in a single measure of a single axis (row or co lumn) for a single star
from a single LC co-addition. Because these solutions are local and c ontain only a small
number of measures, they should be construed as estimators of t he astrometric precision
and not of the overall astrometric accuracy of the spacecraft a nd photometer. Adding terms
that model the diﬀerential velocity aberration across the Keplerﬁeld reduces this error to
about 4 milliarcseconds (about 0.001 pixels), and adding terms arising from the pixel phase
reduce the errors to about 2 milliarcseconds (about 0.0005 pixels). These pixel phase terms
are empirical ﬁts, and are not derived from detailed modeling of the im age formation and
sampling processes.
During the ﬁrst 33.5 days of science operations that followed the en d of commissioning,
the number of stars was increased to 156,000. The volume of data f or this number of stars
observed every 29.4 minutes is large, and the data from the 84 chan nels are diverse. Thus
it is diﬃcult to characterize the entirety of the astrometric solution with a single number.
Again, much development in the astrometric processing is needed be cause every Kepler
star is important. Although only preliminary measures of astrometr ic precision have been
obtained, it is reassuring to see that the observed errors follow th e prediction based on the
ﬂux of the stars involved. Fig. 1 shows the errors for stars in a sing le channel as a function
of the measured Kp, and demonstrates that the error rises as the SNR decreases.
3. Local Astrometric Solutions and the “Rain” Plots
A special case of the astrometric solutions described above can be computed in the
vicinity of individual stars. Under the assumptions of small parallax a nd adequate removal
of diﬀerential velocity aberration, the equations for the apparen t place of a star can be– 9 –
linearized. Simple trend analysis produces a robust estimator for th e mean position of
a star, and residuals from each measurement are computed. This e nables astrometric
processing to contribute to the understanding of the Keplerstars. As more fully discussed
by Batalha et al. (2010), what appears to be a single object can be t wo or more stars,
and each can have photometric variability. Such astrations can mimic the photometric
properties of a transiting planet, and adding astrometry to the ve tting procedure can assist
in the conﬁrmation or denial process. Fig. 2 shows astrometric res iduals for two stars.
The upper star is a blend of a variable star and one or more constant stars while the lower
shows residuals that are typical for a bright, constant star. The astrometric amplitude of
the variable star is huge - almost 0.02 pixels.
The astrometric behavior of an image composed of an unknown numb er of stars each
of which having unknown photometric variations is complicated. Howe ver, the simple case
of two stars, a small photometric variation, and centroids comput ed from ﬂux-weighted
means provides much insight. Where ∆ sis the true separation of the stars, δsis the small
measured astrometric shift, Fis the small relative brightness of the fainter B component
compared to the brighter A component, and fis the small relative change in total brightness
due to a transit or stellar variability, the observed astrometric shif t assuming that the A
component is variable is given by
δs=Ff∆s (2)
If the B component has the photometric variation, the observed s hift is
δs=f∆s (3)
When the Keplerobservations of δsandfare combined with high resolution imagery that
can measure ∆ s,F, and other characteristics such as stellar colors, then the model of the
composite image can be improved.
On the basis of its photometric signature alone, the KeplerObject of Interest (KOI-)– 10 –
15 might involve a transiting planet. The analysis of the combined phot ometric and
astrometric residuals denies this hypothesis. Fig. 3. shows the time series astrometric and
photometric residuals for KOI-15 after they have been high-pass ﬁltered so as to emphasize
signals with shorter timescales. A diﬀerent visualization of the same d ata is called a “Rain
Plot”, and is shown in Fig. 4. Clearly, the astrometric and photometr ic residuals for
KOI-15 are strongly correlated, and these correlations are the s ignature of an astration that
includes one or more relatively constant stars and a background ec lipsing binary. Indeed,
the secondary eclipse is more apparent in the astrometric residuals than in the photometric
residuals. A true transiting planet system should not show these co rrelations. As suggested
by the Rain Plot, the pixel data were re-examined and the oﬀending v ariable star was
identiﬁed as being about 11 arcseconds away from and about 4.8 Kpmagnitudes fainter
than the brighter star.
4. Conclusions
Although based on just a small fraction of the data expected from the entire mission,
the following conclusions can be drawn.
a) Both the preliminary version of the full astrometric solution and t he locally
linearized astrometric solution indicate that the precision of a single m easure of a typical
star is about 0.004 arcsecond (about 0.001 pixel). Results such as t hose shown in Figs. 2
and 3 suggest that the precision for some stars might be substant ially better.
b) On the basis of the limited data available so far, many astrometric e ﬀects cannot be
separated. The astrometric precision should enable the measurem ent of the proper motions
of the known large motion stars in the star list, but as yet proper mo tion is indistinguishable
from diﬀerential velocity aberration, pixel phase, and similar eﬀect s.– 11 –
c) Because of the large pixel size, Keplerimages can often be blends of multiple stars. If
one or more components of such a blend is a photometrically variable s tar, the astrometric
position of the image can have a signiﬁcant motion. Tools such as the R ain Plot have
already demonstrated the utility of combining astrometric and phot ometric processing in
the evaluation of planetary transit candidates.
d) Whereas the astrometric precision of Keplerdata has been demonstrated, the
astrometric accuracy has yet to be evaluated.
In summary, it is the extremely high SNR of the Keplerphotometer that enables
the astrometric analysis of Keplerdata. Even with just the preliminary data, astrometric
analysis is providing an important tool for the physical understand ing of the observations.
Should the astrometric results continue to follow the theoretical e xpectation of improving
with the SNR, then solutions for the parallax and proper motions of a ll stars will be
computed.
Funding for this Discovery mission is provided by NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Many people have contributed to the success of the KeplerMission, and the authors wish
to express their profound thanks to all.
Facilities: The Kepler Mission.– 12 –
Fig. 1.— Astrometric error as a function of Kpmagnitude for stars on Channel 2 in the
Quarter 1 data collection.
Fig. 2.— Astrometric residuals from a blended variable (top) and a non -variable star (bot-
tom) taken from a solution for a single channel. Red symbols are from the columns and blue
symbols are from the rows.– 13 –
−1.5−1−0.500.51Relative Flux Residuals, pptA
−14−12−10−8−6−4−202Row Residuals, mpixB
4965 4970 4975 4980 4985 4990 4995−50510152025Column Residuals, mpix
Time, JD−2450000C
Fig. 3.— Time series residuals for the relative photometric ﬂux (A) in pa rts per thousand,
and the relative astrometric row (B) and column (C) residuals in millipixe ls (1 pixel = 3.98
arcseconds) for KOI-15. The observations have been ﬁltered to remove long-period trends.
The strong correlation between these residuals is taken as evidenc e that this Keplerstar is
actually an astration of one or more relatively constant stars and a background eclipsing
binary.– 14 –
−0.02 −0.01 00.01 0.02 0.03−1.5−1−0.500.51
Centroid Shift, pixelsNormalized Flux Residuals, ppt  
Fig. 4.— The Rain Plot for KOI-15. This visualization shows the correlat ion between
the photometric and astrometric row (red X) and column (blue +) re siduals. The strong
correlation between the position and brightness is evidence that th is is an astration of one
or more relatively constant stars and a background eclipsing binary .– 15 –
REFERENCES
Batalha, N. M., et al. 2010, this issue
Borucki, W. J. et al. 2010, Science, submitted
Bryson, S. T., et al. 2010, this issue
Caldwell, D. A., et al. 2010, this issue
Jenkins, J. M., et al. 2010, this issue
Kaiser, N., Tonry, J. L., Luppino, J. L. 2000, PASP112, 768
King, I. R. 1983, PASP95, 163
Koch, D. G., et al. 2010, this issue
Skrutskie, M. J., et al. 2006, AJ131, 1163
Zacharias N., et al. 2004, AJ127, 3043
This manuscript was prepared with the AAS L ATEX macros v5.2.