arXiv:1001.0564v1  [astro-ph.IM]  4 Jan 2010Title : will be set by the publisher
Editors : will be set by the publisher
EAS Publications Series, Vol. ?, 2018
A DIFFERENT GLANCE TO THE SITE TESTING ABOVE
DOME C
Elena Masciadri1, Franck Lascaux1, Jeﬀrey Stoesz1, Susanna Hagelin1
and Kerstin Geissler2
Abstract. Due to the recent interest shown by astronomers towards the
Antarctic Plateau as a potential site for large astronomica l facilities,
we assisted in the last years to a strengthening of site testi ng activities
in this region, particularly at Dome C. Most of the results co llected
so far concern meteorologic parameters and optical turbule nce mea-
surements based on diﬀerent principles using diﬀerent inst ruments. At
present we have several elements indicating that, above the ﬁrst 20-30
meters, the quality of the optical turbulence above Dome C is better
than above whatever other site in the world. The challenging question,
crucial to know which kind of facilities to build on, is to est ablish how
much better the Dome C is than a mid-latitude site. In this con tri-
bution we will provide some complementary elements and stra tegies of
analysis aiming to answer to this question. We will try to con centrate
the attention on critical points, i.e. open questions that s till require
explanation/attention.
1 Introduction
Most of the site testing done so far above Dome C has been carried o ut with mea-
surements taken with diﬀerent instruments and based on diﬀerent techniques. Our
approach to the site testing in this context is diﬀerent. We intend to estimate the
optical turbulence ( C2
N) with the employment of atmospherical models at meso-
scale, more precisely we plan to use the Meso-Nh model (Masciadri & Jabouille
2001, Masciadri, Avila & Sanchez 2004 , Masciadri & Egner 2006). Th is approach
provides the possibility to reconstruct 3D C2
Nmaps (not only vertical proﬁles)
and to forecast the optical turbulence. The ﬂexible scheduling and optimization
of scientiﬁc observational programs for new class of ground-bas ed telescopes pass
1INAF-Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, Firenze, Italy; e-mail: masciadri@arcetri.astro.it
2European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Cordova 3107, San tiago, Chile
c/circlecopyrtEDP Sciences 2018
DOI: (will be inserted later)2 Title : will be set by the publisher
necessarily by the forecast of the optical turbulence; this topic is therefore strictly
correlated to the success and the survival of the ground-based astronomy of next
decades. We recently set-up a research group at the Osservato rio Astroﬁsico di
Arcetri (Florence)1whose aim is to carry out a project (FOROT) centered on the
characterization and forecast of the Optical Turbulence. The co re project includes
the study of two sites: the Mt. Graham, site of the Large Binocular Telescope
(LBT) and the Internal Antarctic Plateau (Dome C, South Pole and Dome A).
The ﬁnal goal of our work is to employ this technique to other sites in the world
mainly for application to the ELTs. The orographicmaps ofthe Inter nal Antarctic
Plateau, as reconstructed by the Meso-Nh model, is shown in Fig.1. Simulations
will be carried out with diﬀerent horizontal resolution depending on s ite and sci-
entiﬁc goals that we intend to reach.
Why Antarctica ?
•Because the whole International Community showed great interes t with re-
spect to this site.
•Because several site testing campaigns are on-going and this mean s that a
large number of measurements will be soon available. This means a pos si-
bility to constrain models outputs.
•Because we will have the possibility to answer to critical scientiﬁc que stions
among those: (1) ability of meso-scale models in discriminating betwee n
sites located on the same plateau but characterized by diﬀerent tu rbulence
features, (2) characterizationof an uncontaminated site such a s Dome A, (3)
ability of meso-scale models in forecasting the optical turbulence.
2 Challenges at Dome C
We can summarize the promising potentialities of Dome C for future As tronomy
in this Antarctic Continent with the following statement: at Dome C, above
20-30 m the quality of the atmosphere is better than above wha tever
other site at mid-latitude. What does it mean ? Above a good mid-latitude
site, the free atmosphere seeing εFA(by deﬁnition for h≥1 km) is typically
larger than 0.4 arcsec. Above Dome C, the free atmosphere seeing is≤0.4 arcsec
and the thickness of the boundary layer is as thin as a few tens of me ters (∼30
m). An exact estimate of such a thickness is obviously important but we would
like to highlight that it has been shown (Ragazzoni et al. 2004) that, using 2 DMs
opportunely conjugated in the low part of the atmosphere, it is pos sible to correct
the ﬁrst 200 m reaching 15 arcmin FOV with reasonable good Strehl R atio. This
already does of Dome C an extremely interesting site. The residual t urbulence in
the free atmosphere, that is not corrected with the system desc ribed by Ragazzoni
1http://forot.arcetri.astro.itGive a shorter title using \runningtitle 3
Fig. 1.Orographic map centred above South Pole and extended on 3000 km×3000 km.
et al. (2004), is critical to assure the predicted performances. F or this reason we
think that the main priority in a list of studies to be carried out, is to co nﬁrm the
upper limit for εFAmeasured so far. As we will explain in the next section, these
results need to be conﬁrmed.
3 The diﬀerent “glance”
Fundamental requirement for our study is to collect as many as pos sible elements
(included measurements) to constrain simulations. Here we list a few critical
points telling us that we still need further studies in the ﬁelds of site t esting and
a diﬀerent strategic approaches in the organization of site testing campaigns.
(1)The vertical proﬁlers: MASS, SSS and Balloons never ran contempo ra-
neously. We can not, at present, know the dispersion between inst ruments. (2)
Some instruments, such as the SSS, are prototypes and need car eful validation.
A comparison made on statistical base between measurements fro m SSS and an-
other proﬁler taken as a reference need to be done. Results publis hed so far only
concern the comparison between one C2
Nproﬁle from SSS and balloon. (3)Mea-
surements show discrepancies sometimes. In Agabi et al. (2006), for example, the
median isoplanatic angle measured by the DIMM and the Balloons is resp ectively
2.7 and 4.7 arcsec. This corresponds to a discrepancy of ∼50%. What we suspect
is that most of the balloons measurements reach the height of 12 km and above
this height the turbulence is not measured due to balloons explosion. As a conse-4 Title : will be set by the publisher
quence, the isoplanatic angle measured by balloons is larger than the isoplanatic
angle measured by a DIMM.
To supply further elements that might comply with our needs we decid ed to
followadiﬀerentapproach: tostudytheanalysesprovidedbytheE uropeanCenter
for Medium Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) General Circulation Models . These are
vertical proﬁles of absolute and potential temperature, wind spe ed and direction
extracted in the grid point (75◦S, 123◦E), horizontal resolution 0.5◦, extended
up to 0.1 hPa, 60 vertical levels with resolution decreasing with height . Data
have been treated statistically on the 2003-2004 period at heights h≥30 m. The
scientiﬁc goals of this study are: (1) to provide a yearly meteorolog ic parameters
analysis, (2) to calculate the probability to trigger optical turbulen ce in diﬀerent
slabs of atmosphere and in diﬀerent periods of the year and (3) to e stimate the
quality of ECMWF analyses in perspective to use these data to initialise Meso-Nh.
Analyses reliability has been proved in Geissler & Masciadri (2006). In that
paper the main results of this study are extensively described. Figu re 2 shows
the median wind speed in summer and winter time above 2 sites: Dome C a nd
San Pedro M´ artir. The latter has been selected as representativ e of a mid-latitude
site. It is possible to observe that above Dome C the wind speed is par ticularly
weak in summer time on the whole troposphere; a peak appears at ar ound 5 km
above the ground (tropopause). In winter time the wind speed incr eases mono-
tonically above 10 km above the ground reaching 30 m/sec above 20 k m. Such
a strong wind speed should be considered with attention for at least 2 reasons.
Firstly it might trigger dynamic instabilities in the high free atmosphere , secondly
it might aﬀect the wavefront coherence time τ0. This parameter indeed scales as
C2
N(h)·|V(h)|5/3, i.e. is particularly sensitive to large wind speed values.
Fig.3 shows the median wind speed vertical proﬁle in winter time (June a nd July)
above South Pole and the median wind speed vertical proﬁle in winter t ime above
Dome C. Both results are retrieved by statistical estimates of ECM WF analyses.
It is interesting to note that the wind speed at high altitudes is much w eaker at
South Pole than at Dome C.
How we can connect meteorological and astroclimatic parameters ? The study of
the Richardson number Ri=Ri(∂θ/∂h,∂V/∂h), parameter indicating the proba-
bility to triggerturbulence, shows(Geissler& Masciadri2006,Fig.14 )amonotonic
increasingof the turbulence activity above 15km from summer towa rdsand across
the winter time. One would expect therefore a more intense turbule nce activity at
high altitudes during the winter than during the summer time. The tre nd iden-
tiﬁed by the Richardson maps is conﬁrmed by measurements of θ0obtained with
the same instrument in summer and winter time. θ0is much larger in summer
time (6.8 arcsec - Aristidi et al. (2005)) than in winter time (2.7 arcse c - Agabi
et al. (2006)). This means that turbulence at high altitudes is weake r in summer
than in winter time. We should therefore increase the statistic of me asurements
in August, September and October to better characterize this ph enomenon.
A further result related to the seeing in the free atmosphere ( εFA) requiringGive a shorter title using \runningtitle 5
Fig. 2.Comparison between the median wind speed proﬁle estimated d uring the winter
time (full bold line) and summer time (dashed line line) (200 3) above Dome C and the
median wind speed proﬁle estimated above the San Pedro M´ art ir Observatory in summer
(dotted line) and winter (full thin line) time. San Pedro M´ a rtir is taken as representative
of a mid-latitude site.
Fig. 3.ECMWF analyeses estimates. Left: median wind speed vertica l proﬁle in winter
time (June and July) above South Pole (dotted line). Right: m edian wind speed vertical
proﬁle in winter time above Dome C (dotted lines are ﬁrst and t hird quartiles). See
Geissler & Masciadri (2006) for further details.
attention and careful veriﬁcation is the following. We can retrieve f rom the Fig.5
(Agabi et al. 2006) that seeing measured by a DIMM placed at 20 m ab ove the
ground grows in a monotonic way reaching values greater than 1 arc sec in August.
Where this turbulence come from if the seeing above 30 m has been es timated not
greater than 0.4 arcsec during the winter time ? One could think that this is the
contribution associated to the thin layer between 20 and 30 m. If we look at the
typicalC2
Nvalues at 20-30 meters (10−14≤C2
N≤5×10−14) (Fig.3, Agabi et
al. 2006), we calculate the correspondent seeing in the 20-30 m slab and we ﬁnally6 Title : will be set by the publisher
subtract2the result from the seeing reported in Fig.5, we ﬁnd a seeing in the ran ge
0.45 - 0.92 arcsec (at h ≥30 m). We therefore obtain a seeing above 30 m that
is greater than the 0.4 arcsec indicated by preliminary results. This e xhorts us in
pushing on further studies of seeing in this region of the atmospher e.
4 Conclusion
We summarize the main points discussed in this contribution: (1)We indicated
an alternative method (ECMWF analyses) to check measurements, to constrain
simulations and characterize climatology above Dome C. (2)Further optical tur-
bulence measurements are necessary to carry out all scientiﬁc pr ograms related
to site testing. However it would be suitable that future site testing campaigns
are planned conjointly with all teams working on site testing taking int o account
requirements of all scientiﬁc programs. This is the only way to maximiz e the
scientiﬁc outputs of activities supported by an international logist ic (IPEV and
PNRA) and funded by national and international structures such as the EC. (3)
We recommend to run the SSS in contemporary way to the DIMM (N◦1) adapted
to isoplanatic angle measurements placed at the same height than SS S (8 m) and
to the DIMM (N◦2) placed at 20 m. It would be fundamental to collect a large
statistic employing this instruments conﬁguration. In this way we will have3 inde-
pendent ways to measure the free atmosphere and it will be able to c ross-correlate
results in this particular critical region of the atmosphere. This app roach is par-
ticularly important for the FOROT activities and also, as explained in Se ction 2,
to design the future of Astronomy at Dome C.
5 Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Marie Curie Excellence Grant (FORO T) -
MEXT-CT-2005-023878
References
Aristidi, E., Agabi, K., Fossat, E., Azouit, M., Martin, F., Sadibekova, T., Travouillon,
T., Vernin, J., Ziad, A. 2005c, A&A, 444, 2, 651
Agabi, K., Aristidi, E., Azouit, M., Fossat, E., Martin, F., Sadibekova, T., Vernin, J.,
Ziad, A. 2006, PASP, 118, 344
Geissler, K. & Masciadri, E. 2006, PASP, 118, 845, 1048
Masciadri & Jabouille, 2001, A&A, 2001, 376, 727
Masciadri, E., Avila, R., Sanchez, L., 2004, RMxAA, 40, 3
Masciadri, E. & Egner, S., 2006, PASP, 118, 848, 1604
Ragazzoni et al. 2004, 16 April 2004 - Workshop at LUAN, Nice, France
2The seeing subtraction is done following the/parenleftbig/summationtext
(εi)5/3/parenrightbig3/5rule.